treaty
between
the kingdom of belgium, the republic of bulgaria, the czech republic, the kingdom of
denmark, the federal republic of germany, the republic of estonia, ireland, the
hellenic republic, the kingdom of spain, the french republic, the italian republic, the
republic of cyprus, the republic of latvia, the republic of lithuania, the grand duchy
of luxembourg, the republic of hungary, the republic of malta, the kingdom of the
netherlands, the republic of austria, the republic of poland, the portuguese republic,
romania, the republic of slovenia, the slovak republic, the republic of finland, the
kingdom of sweden, the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland
(member states of the european union)
and
the republic of croatia
concerning the accession of the republic of croatia to the european union
his majesty the king of the belgians,
the president of the republic of bulgaria,
the president of the czech republic,
her majesty the queen of denmark,
the president of the federal republic of germany,
the president of the republic of estonia,
the president of ireland,
the president of the hellenic republic,
his majesty the king of spain,
the president of the french republic,
the republic of croatia,
the president of the italian republic,
the president of the republic of cyprus,
the president of the republic of latvia,
the president of the republic of lithuania,
his royal highness the grand duke of luxembourg,
the president of the republic of hungary,
the president of malta,
her majesty the queen of the netherlands,
the federal president of the republic of austria,
l / en official journal of the european union ..
the president of the republic of poland,
the president of the portuguese republic,
the president of romania,
the president of the republic of slovenia,
the president of the slovak republic,
the president of the republic of finland,
the government of the kingdom of sweden,
her majesty the queen of the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland,
united in their desire to pursue the attainment of the objectives of the european union,
determined to continue the process of creating an ever closer union among the peoples of europe on the foundations
already laid,
considering that article  of the treaty on european union affords european states the opportunity of becoming
members of the union,
considering that the republic of croatia has applied to become a member of the union,
considering that the council, after having obtained the opinion of the commission and the consent of the european
parliament, has declared itself in favour of the admission of the republic of croatia,
have agreed on the conditions of admission and the adjustments to be made to the treaty on european union, the
treaty on the functioning of the european union and to the treaty establishing the european atomic energy
community, and to this end have designated as their plenipotentiaries:
his majesty the king of the belgians,
elio di rupo
prime minister
the president of the republic of bulgaria,
boyko borissov
prime minister
the president of the czech republic,
petr necas
prime minister
her majesty the queen of denmark,
helle thorning-schmidt
prime minister
the president of the federal republic of germany,
dr. angela merkel
chancellor
.. official en journal of the european union l /
the president of the republic of estonia,
andrus ansip
prime minister
the president of ireland,
enda kenny
taoiseach (prime minister)
the president of the hellenic republic,
lucas papademos
prime minister
his majesty the king of spain,
josé luis rodriguez zapatero
president of the government
the president of the french republic,
jean leonetti
minister for europe
the republic of croatia,
ivo josipović,
president
jadranka kosor
prime minister
the president of the italian republic,
sen. prof. mario monti
president of the council of ministers
the president of the republic of cyprus,
demetris christofias
president
the president of the republic of latvia,
valdis dombrovskis
prime minister
the president of the republic of lithuania,
dalia grybauskaitė
president
his royal highness the grand duke of luxembourg,
jean-claude juncker
prime minister, minister of state
l / en official journal of the european union ..
the president of the republic of hungary,
viktor orbán
prime minister
the president of malta,
lawrence gonzi
prime minister
her majesty the queen of the netherlands,
mark rutte
prime minister, minister of general affairs
the federal president of the republic of austria,
werner faymann
federal chancellor
the president of the republic of poland,
donald tusk
prime minister
the president of the portuguese republic,
pedro passos coelho
prime minister
the president of romania,
traian băsescu
president
the president of the republic of slovenia,
borut pahor
president of the government
the president of the slovak republic,
iveta radicova
prime minister
the president of the republic of finland,
jyrki katainen
prime minister
the government of the kingdom of sweden,
fredrik reinfeldt
prime minister
.. official en journal of the european union l /
her majesty the queen of the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland,
the rt. hon. david cameron
prime minister
who, having exchanged their full powers found in good and due form,
have agreed as follows:
article 
. the republic of croatia hereby becomes a member of the
european union and of the european atomic energy
community.
. the republic of croatia becomes a party to the treaty on
european union, the treaty on the functioning of the european
union and the treaty establishing the european atomic energy
community as amended or supplemented.
. the conditions of admission and the adjustments to the
treaties referred to in paragraph , entailed by such admission,
are set out in the act annexed to this treaty. the provisions of
that act are an integral part of this treaty.
article 
the provisions concerning the rights and obligations of the
member states and the powers and jurisdiction of the institutions of the union, as set out in the treaties to which the
republic of croatia becomes a party by virtue of article (),
shall apply in respect of this treaty.
article 
. this treaty shall be ratified by the high contracting
parties in accordance with their respective constitutional
requirements. the instruments of ratification shall be
deposited with the government of the italian republic by
 june .
. by ratifying this treaty, the republic of croatia is also
deemed to have ratified or approved any amendments to the
treaties referred to in article () open for ratification or
approval by the member states pursuant to article  of the
treaty on european union at the moment of ratification of this
treaty by the republic of croatia, as well as any acts of the
institutions, adopted at or before that same moment and which
only enter into force after having been approved by the member
states in accordance with their respective constitutional requirements.
. this treaty shall enter into force on  july  provided
that all the instruments of ratification have been deposited
before that date.
. notwithstanding paragraph , the institutions of the
union may adopt before accession the measures referred to in
article (), article (), second subparagraph, (), second
subparagraph, (), second and third subparagraphs, (),
second subparagraph, (), third subparagraph, article ,
articles (), (), (), () and (), articles , ,
, , , , ,  and  and annexes iv to vi of the
act referred to in article ().
these measures shall enter into force only subject to and on the
date of the entry into force of this treaty.
. notwithstanding paragraph , article  of the act
referred to in article () applies upon signature of this treaty.
article 
this treaty, drawn up in a single original in the bulgarian,
croatian, czech, danish, dutch, english, estonian, finnish,
french, german, greek, hungarian, irish, italian, latvian,
lithuanian, maltese, polish, portuguese, romanian, slovak,
slovenian, spanish and swedish languages, the texts in each
of these languages being equally authentic, shall be deposited
in the archives of the government of the italian republic, which
will transmit a certified copy to each of the governments of the
other signatory states.
in witness whereof the undersigned plenipotentiaries have signed this treaty.
съставено в брюксел на девети декември две хиляди и единадесета година.
hecho en bruselas, el nueve de diciembre de dos mil once.
v bruselu dne devátého prosince dva tisíce jedenáct.
udfærdiget i bruxelles den niende december to tusind og elleve.
geschehen zu brüssel am neunten dezember zweitausendelf.
kahe tuhande üheteistkümnenda aasta detsembrikuu üheksandal päeval brüsselis.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
έγινε στις βρυξέλλες, στις εννέα δεκεμβρίου δύο χιλιάδες έντεκα.
done at brussels on the ninth day of december in the year two thousand and eleven.
fait à bruxelles, le neuf décembre deux mille onze.
arna dhéanamh sa bhruiséil, an naoú lá de mhí na nollag an bhliain dhá mhíle agus a haon déag.
sastavljeno u bruxellesu dana devetog prosinca godine dvije tisuće jedanaeste.
fatto a bruxelles, addì nove dicembre duemilaundici.
briselē, divtūkstoš vienpadsmitā gada devītajā decembrī.
priimta du tūkstančiai vienuoliktų metų gruodžio devintą dieną briuselyje.
kelt brüsszelben, a kétezer-tizenegyedik év december havának kilencedik napján.
magħmul fi brussell, fid-disa jum ta’ diċembru tas-sena elfejn u ħdax.
gedaan te brussel, de negende december tweeduizend elf.
sporządzono w brukseli dnia dziewiątego grudnia roku dwa tysiące jedenastego.
feito em bruxelas, em nove de dezembro de dois mil e onze.
întocmit la bruxelles la nouă decembrie două mii unsprezece.
v bruseli dňa deviateho decembra dvetisícjedenásť.
v bruslju, dne devetega decembra leta dva tisoč enajst.
tehty brysselissä yhdeksäntenä päivänä joulukuuta vuonna kaksituhattayksitoista.
som skedde i bryssel den nionde december tjugohundraelva.
voor zijne majesteit de koning der belgen
pour sa majesté le roi des belges
für seine majestät den könig der belgier
deze handtekening verbindt eveneens de vlaamse gemeenschap, de franse gemeenschap, de duitstalige gemeenschap,
het vlaams gewest, het waals gewest en het brussels hoofdstedelijk gewest.
cette signature engage également la communauté française, la communauté flamande, la communauté germanophone,
la région wallonne, la région flamande et la région de bruxelles-capitale.
diese unterschrift bindet zugleich die deutschsprachige gemeinschaft, die flämische gemeinschaft, die französische
gemeinschaft, die wallonische region, die flämische region und die region brüssel-hauptstadt.
за република българия
.. official en journal of the european union l /
za prezidenta české republiky
for hendes majestæt danmarks dronning
für den präsidenten der bundesrepublik deutschland
eesti vabariigi presidendi nimel
thar ceann uachtarán na héireann
for the president of ireland
για τον пρόεδρο της еλληνικής δημοκρατίας
l / en official journal of the european union ..
por su majestad el rey de españa
pour le président de la république française
za republiku hrvatsku
per il presidente della repubblica italiana
για τον пρόεδρο της кνπριαкής δημοκρατίας
latvijas republikas valsts prezidenta vārdā –
.. official en journal of the european union l /
lietuvos respublikos prezidentės vardu
pour son altesse royale le grand-duc de luxembourg
a magyar köztársaság elnöke részéről
għall-president ta' malta
voor hare majesteit de koningin der nederlanden
l / en official journal of the european union ..
für den bundespräsidenten der republik österreich
za prezydenta rzeczypospolitej polskiej
pelo presidente da república portuguesa
pentru președintele româniei
za predsednika republike slovenije
.. official en journal of the european union l /
za prezidenta slovenskej republiky
suomen tasavallan presidentin puolesta
för republiken finlands president
för konungariket sveriges regering
for her majesty the queen of the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland
l / en official journal of the european union ..
act
concerning the conditions of accession of the republic of croatia and the adjustments to the treaty
on european union, the treaty on the functioning of the european union and the treaty
establishing the european atomic energy community
part one
principles
article 
for the purposes of this act:
— the expression ‘original treaties’ means:
(a) the treaty on european union (teu) and the treaty on
the functioning of the european union (tfeu), as
amended or supplemented by treaties or other acts
which entered into force before the accession of the
republic of croatia;
(b) the treaty establishing the european atomic energy
community (eaec treaty), as amended or supplemented by treaties or other acts which entered into
force before the accession of the republic of croatia,
— the expression ‘present member states’ means the kingdom
of belgium, the republic of bulgaria, the czech republic,
the kingdom of denmark, the federal republic of germany,
the republic of estonia, ireland, the hellenic republic, the
kingdom of spain, the french republic, the italian republic,
the republic of cyprus, the republic of latvia, the republic
of lithuania, the grand duchy of luxembourg, the republic
of hungary, the republic of malta, the kingdom of the
netherlands, the republic of austria, the republic of
poland, the portuguese republic, romania, the republic of
slovenia, the slovak republic, the republic of finland, the
kingdom of sweden and the united kingdom of great
britain and northern ireland,
— the expression ‘the union’ means the european union
founded on the teu and on the tfeu and/or, as the case
may be, the european atomic energy community,
— the expression ‘the institutions’ means the institutions established by the teu.
article 
from the date of accession, the provisions of the original
treaties and the acts adopted by the institutions before
accession shall be binding on croatia and shall apply in
croatia under the conditions laid down in those treaties and
in this act.
where amendments to the original treaties have been agreed by
the representatives of the governments of the member states
pursuant to article () of the teu after the ratification of the
treaty of accession by croatia and where those amendments
have not entered into force by the date of accession, croatia
shall ratify those amendments in accordance with its constitutional requirements.
article 
. croatia accedes to the decisions and agreements of the
heads of state or government of the member states meeting
within the european council.
. croatia accedes to the decisions and agreements adopted
by the representatives of the governments of the member states
meeting within the council.
. croatia is in the same situation as the present member
states in respect of declarations or resolutions of, or other
positions taken up by, the european council or the council
and in respect of those concerning the union adopted by
common agreement of the member states. croatia will
accordingly observe the principles and guidelines deriving
from those declarations, resolutions or other positions and
will take such measures as may be necessary to ensure their
implementation.
. croatia accedes to the conventions and protocols listed in
annex i. those conventions and protocols shall enter into force
in relation to croatia on the date determined by the council in
the decisions referred to in paragraph .
. the council, acting unanimously on a recommendation
by the commission and after consulting the european
parliament, shall decide to make all adjustments required by
reason of the accession to the conventions and protocols
referred to in paragraph  and publish the adapted texts in
the official journal of the european union.
. croatia undertakes, in respect of the conventions and
protocols referred to in paragraph , to introduce administrative
and other arrangements, such as those adopted by the date of
accession by the present member states or by the council, and
to facilitate practical cooperation between the member states'
institutions and organisations.
. the council, acting unanimously on a proposal from the
commission, may supplement annex i with the relevant
conventions, agreements and protocols signed before the date
of accession.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
article 
. the provisions of the schengen acquis as referred to in the
protocol on the schengen acquis integrated into the framework
of the european union (hereinafter referred to as the ‘schengen
protocol’), annexed to the teu and the tfeu, and the acts
building upon it or otherwise related to it, listed in annex ii,
as well as any further such acts adopted before the date of
accession, shall be binding on, and applicable in, croatia from
the date of accession.
. those provisions of the schengen acquis as integrated into
the framework of the european union and the acts building
upon it or otherwise related to it not referred to in paragraph ,
while binding on croatia from the date of accession, shall only
apply in croatia pursuant to a council decision to that effect,
after verification, in accordance with the applicable schengen
evaluation procedures, that the necessary conditions for the
application of all parts of the relevant acquis have been met
in croatia, including the effective application of all schengen
rules in accordance with the agreed common standards and
with fundamental principles. that decision shall be taken by
the council, in accordance with the applicable schengen
procedures and while taking into account a commission
report confirming that croatia continues to fulfil the
commitments undertaken in its accession negotiations that are
relevant for the schengen acquis.
the council shall take its decision, after consulting the
european parliament, acting with the unanimity of its
members representing the governments of the member states
in respect of which the provisions referred to in this paragraph
have already been put into effect and of the representative of
the government of the republic of croatia. the members of the
council representing the governments of ireland and of the
united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland shall
take part in such a decision insofar as it relates to the provisions
of the schengen acquis and the acts building upon it or
otherwise related to it in which these member states participate.
article 
croatia shall participate in the economic and monetary union
from the date of accession as a member state with a derogation
within the meaning of article  of the tfeu.
article 
. the agreements concluded or provisionally applied by the
union with one or more third countries, with an international
organisation or with a national of a third country shall, under
the conditions laid down in the original treaties and in this act,
be binding on croatia.
. croatia undertakes to accede, under the conditions laid
down in this act, to the agreements concluded or signed by
the present member states and the union with one or more
third countries or with an international organisation.
unless otherwise provided for in specific agreements referred to
in the first subparagraph, the accession of croatia to such
agreements shall be agreed by the conclusion of a protocol to
such agreements between the council, acting unanimously on
behalf of the member states, and the third country or countries
or international organisation concerned. the commission, or
the high representative of the union for foreign affairs and
security policy (the high representative) where the agreement
relates exclusively or principally to the common foreign and
security policy, shall negotiate these protocols on behalf of
the member states on the basis of negotiating directives
approved by the council, acting unanimously, and in consultation with a committee comprised of the representatives of the
member states. the commission, or the high representative, as
appropriate, shall submit a draft of the protocols for conclusion
to the council.
this procedure is without prejudice to the exercise of the
union's own competences and does not affect the allocation
of powers between the union and the member states as
regards the conclusion of such agreements in the future or
any other amendments not related to accession.
. as of the date of accession, and pending the entry into
force of the necessary protocols referred to in the second
subparagraph of paragraph , croatia shall apply the provisions
of the agreements referred to in the first subparagraph of
paragraph  concluded or provisionally applied before the
date of accession, with the exception of the agreement
between the european community and its member states, of
the one part, and the swiss confederation, of the other, on the
free movement of persons ().
pending the entry into force of the protocols referred to in the
second subparagraph of paragraph , the union and the
member states, acting jointly as appropriate in the framework
of their respective competences, shall take any appropriate
measure.
. croatia accedes to the partnership agreement between the
members of the african, caribbean and pacific group of states,
of the one part, and the european community and its member
states, of the other part, signed in cotonou on  june
 (), as well as to the two agreements amending that
agreement, signed in luxembourg on  june  () and
opened for signature in ouagadougou on  june  (),
respectively.
. croatia undertakes to accede, under the conditions laid
down in this act, to the agreement on the european
economic area (), in accordance with article  of that
agreement.
. as of the date of accession, croatia shall apply the
bilateral textile agreements and arrangements concluded
between the union and third countries.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
(
) oj l , .., p. .
(
) oj l , .., p. .
(
) oj l , .., p. , oj l , .., p.  and oj
l m, .., p. .
(
) oj l , .., p. .
(
) oj l , .., p. .
the quantitative restrictions applied by the union on imports of
textile and clothing products shall be adjusted to take account
of the accession of croatia to the union. to that effect,
amendments to the bilateral textile agreements and
arrangements referred to in the first subparagraph may be
negotiated by the union with the third countries concerned
prior to the date of accession.
should the amendments to the bilateral textile agreements and
arrangements not have entered into force by the date of
accession, the union shall make the necessary adjustments to
its rules for the import of textile and clothing products from
third countries to take into account the accession of croatia.
. the quantitative restrictions applied by the union on
imports of steel and steel products shall be adjusted on the
basis of imports of croatia over recent years of steel and steel
products originating in the supplier countries concerned.
to that effect, the necessary amendments to the bilateral steel
agreements and arrangements concluded between the union
and third countries shall be negotiated prior to the date of
accession.
should the amendments to the bilateral steel agreements and
arrangements not have entered into force by the date of
accession, the provisions of the first subparagraph shall apply.
. as of the date of accession, fisheries agreements
concluded between croatia and third countries prior to that
date shall be managed by the union.
the rights and obligations for croatia which result from those
agreements shall not be affected during the period in which the
provisions of those agreements are provisionally maintained.
as soon as possible, and in any event before the expiry of the
agreements referred to in the first subparagraph, appropriate
decisions for the continuation of fishing activities resulting
from those agreements shall be adopted in each case by the
council, acting by qualified majority on a proposal from the
commission, including the possibility of extending certain
agreements for periods not exceeding one year.
. croatia shall withdraw from any free trade agreements
with third countries, including the central european free
trade agreement as amended.
to the extent that agreements between croatia on the one
hand, and one or more third countries on the other, are not
compatible with the obligations arising from this act, croatia
shall take all appropriate steps to eliminate the incompatibilities
established. if croatia encounters difficulties in adjusting an
agreement concluded with one or more third countries, it
shall withdraw from that agreement.
croatia shall take all the necessary measures to ensure
compliance with the obligations of this paragraph as of the
date of accession.
. croatia accedes, under the conditions laid down in this
act, to the internal agreements concluded by the present
member states for the purpose of implementing the agreements
referred to in paragraphs  and .
. croatia shall take appropriate measures, where necessary,
to adjust its position in relation to international organisations,
and to those international agreements to which the union or to
which other member states are also parties, to the rights and
obligations arising from croatia's accession to the union.
croatia shall in particular withdraw from international fisheries
agreements and organisations to which the union is also a
party, unless its membership relates to matters other than
fisheries.
croatia shall take all necessary measures to ensure compliance
with the obligations of this paragraph as of the date of
accession.
article 
. the provisions of this act may not, unless otherwise
provided herein, be suspended, amended or repealed other
than by means of the procedure laid down in the original
treaties enabling those treaties to be revised.
. acts adopted by the institutions to which the transitional
provisions laid down in this act relate shall retain their status in
law; in particular, the procedures for amending those acts shall
continue to apply.
. provisions of this act the purpose or effect of which is to
repeal or amend acts adopted by the institutions, unless such
provisions are of a transitional nature, shall have the same
status in law as the provisions which they repeal or amend
and shall be subject to the same rules as those provisions.
article 
the application of the original treaties and acts adopted by the
institutions shall, as a transitional measure, be subject to the
derogations provided for in this act.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
part two
adjustments to the treaties
title i
institutional provisions
article 
the protocol on the statute of the court of justice of the
european union, annexed to the teu, the tfeu and the
eaec treaty, shall be amended as follows:
() in article , the first paragraph shall be replaced by the
following:
‘when, every three years, the judges are partially replaced,
 judges shall be replaced.’;
() article  shall be replaced by the following:
‘article 
the general court shall consist of  judges.’.
article 
the protocol on the statute of the european investment bank,
annexed to the teu and the tfeu, shall be amended as follows:
() in article (), first subparagraph:
(a) the introductory sentence shall be replaced by the
following:
‘. the capital of the bank shall be
eur    , subscribed by the member
states as follows:’;
(b) the following shall be inserted between the entries for
romania and slovakia:
‘croatia   ’;
() in article (), the first, second and third subparagraphs
shall be replaced by the following:
‘. the board of directors shall consist of twenty-nine
directors and nineteen alternate directors.
the directors shall be appointed by the board of governors
for five years, one nominated by each member state, and
one nominated by the commission.
the alternate directors shall be appointed by the board of
governors for five years as shown below:
— two alternates nominated by the federal republic of
germany,
— two alternates nominated by the french republic,
— two alternates nominated by the italian republic,
— two alternates nominated by the united kingdom of
great britain and northern ireland,
— one alternate nominated by common accord of the
kingdom of spain and the portuguese republic,
— one alternate nominated by common accord of the
kingdom of belgium, the grand duchy of luxembourg
and the kingdom of the netherlands,
— two alternates nominated by common accord of the
kingdom of denmark, the hellenic republic, ireland
and romania,
— two alternates nominated by common accord of the
republic of estonia, the republic of latvia, the
republic of lithuania, the republic of austria, the
republic of finland and the kingdom of sweden,
— four alternates nominated by common accord of the
republic of bulgaria, the czech republic, the republic
of croatia, the republic of cyprus, the republic of
hungary, the republic of malta, the republic of
poland, the republic of slovenia and the slovak
republic,
— one alternate nominated by the commission.’.
article 
article (), first subparagraph, of the eaec treaty on the
composition of the scientific and technical committee shall be
replaced by the following:
‘. the committee shall consist of forty-two members,
appointed by the council after consultation with the
commission.’.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
title ii
other adjustments
article 
in article () of the tfeu, the following sentence is added:
‘in respect of restrictions existing under national law in
croatia, the relevant date shall be  december .’.
article 
article () of the teu shall be replaced by the following:
‘. the treaties shall apply to the kingdom of belgium,
the republic of bulgaria, the czech republic, the kingdom of
denmark, the federal republic of germany, the republic of
estonia, ireland, the hellenic republic, the kingdom of spain,
the french republic, the republic of croatia, the italian
republic, the republic of cyprus, the republic of latvia,
the republic of lithuania, the grand duchy of luxembourg,
the republic of hungary, the republic of malta, the kingdom
of the netherlands, the republic of austria, the republic of
poland, the portuguese republic, romania, the republic of
slovenia, the slovak republic, the republic of finland, the
kingdom of sweden and the united kingdom of great
britain and northern ireland.’.
article 
. article () of the teu shall be replaced by the
following:
‘. this treaty, drawn up in a single original in the
bulgarian, croatian, czech, danish, dutch, english,
estonian, finnish, french, german, greek, hungarian, irish,
italian, latvian, lithuanian, maltese, polish, portuguese,
romanian, slovak, slovenian, spanish and swedish
languages, the texts in each of these languages being
equally authentic, shall be deposited in the archives of the
government of the italian republic, which will transmit a
certified copy to each of the governments of the other
signatory states.’.
. article , second paragraph, of the eaec treaty shall
be replaced by the following:
‘pursuant to the accession treaties, the bulgarian, croatian,
czech, danish, english, estonian, finnish, greek, hungarian,
irish, latvian, lithuanian, maltese, polish, portuguese,
romanian, slovak, slovenian, spanish and swedish versions
of this treaty shall also be authentic.’.
part three
permanent provisions
article 
the acts listed in annex iii shall be adapted as specified in that annex.
article 
the measures listed in annex iv shall be applied under the conditions laid down in that annex.
article 
the council, acting unanimously on a proposal from the commission and after consulting the european
parliament, may make the adaptations to the provisions of this act relating to the common agricultural
policy which may prove necessary as a result of a modification in union rules.
part four
temporary provisions
title i
transitional measures
article 
the measures listed in annex v shall apply in respect of croatia under the conditions laid down in that
annex.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
title ii
institutional provisions
article 
. by way of derogation from article  of the protocol on
transitional provisions, annexed to the teu, the tfeu and the
eaec treaty, and by way of derogation from the maximum
number of seats provided for in the first subparagraph of
article () of the teu, the number of members of the
european parliament shall be increased by  members from
croatia, to take account of the accession of croatia, for the
period running from the date of accession until the end of
the - term of the european parliament.
. by way of derogation from article () of the teu,
croatia shall, before the date of accession, hold ad hoc
elections to the european parliament, by direct universal
suffrage of its people, for the number of members fixed in
paragraph  of this article, in accordance with the union
acquis. however, if the date of accession is less than six
months before the next elections to the european parliament,
the members of the european parliament representing the
citizens of croatia may be designated by the national parliament
of croatia, from its midst, provided that the persons in question
have been elected by direct universal suffrage.
article 
article () of the protocol on transitional provisions, annexed
to the teu, the tfeu and the eaec treaty, shall be replaced by
the following:
‘. until  october , the following provisions shall
remain in force, without prejudice to the second
subparagraph of article () of the treaty on the functioning of the european union.
for acts of the european council and of the council
requiring a qualified majority, members' votes shall be
weighted as follows:
belgium 
bulgaria 
czech republic 
denmark 
germany 
estonia 
ireland 
greece 
spain 
france 
croatia 
italy 
cyprus 
latvia 
lithuania 
luxembourg 
hungary 
malta 
netherlands 
austria 
poland 
portugal 
romania 
slovenia 
slovakia 
finland 
sweden 
united kingdom 
acts shall be adopted if there are at least  votes in favour
representing a majority of the members where, under the
treaties, they must be adopted on a proposal from the
commission. in other cases decisions shall be adopted if
there are at least  votes in favour representing at least
two thirds of the members.
a member of the european council or the council may
request that, where an act is adopted by the european
council or the council by a qualified majority, a check is
made to ensure that the member states comprising the
qualified majority represent at least  % of the total population of the union. if that proves not to be the case, the act
shall not be adopted.’.
article 
. a national of croatia shall be appointed to the
commission as of the date of accession until  october
. the new member of the commission shall be
appointed by the council, acting by qualified majority and by
common accord with the president of the commission, after
consulting the european parliament and in accordance with the
criteria set out in the second subparagraph of article () of
the teu.
. the term of office of the member appointed in accordance
with paragraph  shall expire at the same time as those of the
members in office at the time of accession.
article 
. the term of office of the judge of the court of justice and
the judge of the general court appointed from croatia upon its
accession in accordance with the third subparagraph of
article () of the teu shall expire, respectively, on
 october  and  august .
l / en official journal of the european union ..
. for the purpose of judging cases pending before the court
of justice and the general court on the date of accession in
respect of which oral proceedings have started before that date,
the full courts of the court of justice and the general court or
the chambers thereof shall be composed as before accession
and shall apply the rules of procedure in force on the day
preceding the date of accession.
article 
. by way of derogation from article , first paragraph, of
the tfeu establishing the maximum number of members of the
economic and social committee, article  of the protocol on
transitional provisions, annexed to the teu, the tfeu and the
eaec treaty, shall be replaced by the following:
‘article 
until the entry into force of the decision referred to in
article  of the treaty on the functioning of the
european union, the allocation of members of the
economic and social committee shall be as follows:
belgium 
bulgaria 
czech republic 
denmark 
germany 
estonia 
ireland 
greece 
spain 
france 
croatia 
italy 
cyprus 
latvia 
lithuania 
luxembourg 
hungary 
malta 
netherlands 
austria 
poland 
portugal 
romania 
slovenia 
slovakia 
finland 
sweden 
united kingdom ’
. the number of members of the economic and social
committee shall be temporarily increased to  to take
account of the accession of croatia for the period running
from the date of accession until the end of the term of office
during which croatia accedes to the union or until the entry
into force of the decision referred to in article , second
paragraph, of the tfeu, whichever comes first.
. if the decision referred to in article , second paragraph, of the tfeu has already been adopted by the date of
accession, by way of derogation from article , first paragraph, of the tfeu establishing the maximum number of
members of the economic and social committee, croatia
shall be temporarily allocated an appropriate number of
members until the end of the term of office during which it
accedes to the union.
article 
. by way of derogation from article , first paragraph, of
the tfeu establishing the maximum number of members of the
committee of the regions, article  of the protocol on transitional provisions, annexed to the teu, the tfeu and the eaec
treaty, shall be replaced by the following:
‘article 
until the entry into force of the decision referred to in
article  of the treaty on the functioning of the
european union, the allocation of members of the
committee of the regions shall be as follows:
belgium 
bulgaria 
czech republic 
denmark 
germany 
estonia 
ireland 
greece 
spain 
france 
croatia 
italy 
cyprus 
latvia 
lithuania 
luxembourg 
hungary 
malta 
netherlands 
austria 
poland 
portugal 
romania 
.. official en journal of the european union l /
slovenia 
slovakia 
finland 
sweden 
united kingdom ’
. the number of members of the committee of the regions
shall be temporarily increased to  to take account of the
accession of croatia for the period running from the date of
accession until the end of the term of office during which
croatia accedes to the union or until the entry into force of
the decision referred to in article , second paragraph, of the
tfeu, whichever comes first.
. if the decision referred to in article , second paragraph, of the tfeu has already been adopted by the date of
accession, by way of derogation from article , first paragraph, of the tfeu establishing the maximum number of
members of the committee of the regions, croatia shall be
temporarily allocated an appropriate number of members
until the end of the term of office during which it accedes to
the union.
article 
the term of office of the director of the board of directors of
the european investment bank, nominated by croatia and
appointed upon accession as provided for in the second
subparagraph of article () of the protocol on the statute of
the european investment bank shall expire at the end of the
annual meeting of the board of governors during which the
annual report for the  financial year is examined.
article 
. new members of the committees, groups, agencies or
other bodies created by the original treaties or by an act of
the institutions shall be appointed under the conditions and
according to the procedures laid down for the appointment
of members of those committees, groups, agencies or other
bodies. the terms of office of the newly appointed members
shall expire at the same time as those of the members in office
at the time of accession.
. the membership of the committees, groups, agencies or
other bodies created by the original treaties or by an act of the
institutions with a number of members which is fixed, irrespective of the number of member states, shall be completely
renewed upon accession, unless the terms of office of the
present members expire within  months from accession.
title iii
financial provisions
article 
. from the date of accession, croatia shall pay the following
amount corresponding to its share of the capital paid in for the
subscribed capital as defined in article  of the statute of the
european investment bank:
croatia eur   
the contribution shall be paid in eight equal instalments falling
due on  november ,  november ,  november
,  may ,  november ,  may ,
 november  and  may .
. croatia shall contribute, in eight equal instalments falling
due on the dates provided for in paragraph , to the reserves
and provisions equivalent to reserves, as well as to the amount
still to be appropriated to the reserves and provisions,
comprising the balance of the profit and loss account, established at the end of the month preceding accession, as entered
on the balance sheet of the european investment bank, in
amounts corresponding to the following percentage of the
reserves and provisions:
croatia , %
. the capital and payments provided for in paragraphs 
and  shall be paid in by croatia in cash in euro, save by way
of derogation decided unanimously by the board of governors
of the european investment bank.
. the figures for croatia referred to in paragraph  as well
as in article , point , may be adapted by decision of the
european investment bank governing bodies on the basis of the
latest final data of gdp published by eurostat before accession.
article 
. croatia shall pay the following amount to the research
fund for coal and steel referred to in decision //ecsc
of the representatives of the governments of the member
states, meeting within the council, of  february  on
the financial consequences of the expiry of the ecsc treaty and
on the research fund for coal and steel ():
(eur, current prices)
croatia  .
. the contribution to the research fund for coal and steel
shall be made in four instalments starting in  and paid as
follows, in each case on the first working day of the first month
of each year:
l / en official journal of the european union ..
(
) oj l , .., p. .
— :  %,
— :  %,
— :  %,
— :  %.
article 
. procurement, grant awards and payments for preaccession financial assistance under the transition assistance
and institution building component and the cross-border
cooperation component of the instrument for pre-accession
assistance (ipa), established by council regulation (ec)
no / of  july  (), for funds committed
before accession, with the exclusion of the croatia-hungary
and croatia-slovenia cross-border programmes, and for
assistance under the transition facility referred to in article ,
shall be managed by croatian implementing agencies as of the
date of accession.
the ex ante control by the commission over procurement and
grant awards shall be waived by a commission decision to that
effect, after the commission has satisfied itself of the effective
functioning of the management and control system concerned
in accordance with the criteria and conditions laid down in
article () of council regulation (ec, euratom)
no / of  june  on the financial regulation
applicable to the general budget of the european communities () and in article  of commission regulation (ec)
no / of  june  implementing council regulation (ec) no / establishing an instrument for preaccession assistance (ipa) ().
if the commission decision to waive ex ante control has not
been adopted before the date of accession, any contracts signed
between the date of accession and the date on which the
commission decision is adopted shall not be eligible under
the pre-accession financial assistance and the transition
facility referred to in the first subparagraph.
. budgetary commitments made before the date of
accession under the pre-accession financial assistance and the
transition facility referred to in paragraph , including the
conclusion and registration of subsequent individual legal
commitments and payments made after accession, shall
continue to be governed by the rules applying to the preaccession financial instruments and be charged to the
corresponding budget chapters until closure of the programmes
and projects concerned.
. the provisions on the implementation of budgetary
commitments of financing agreements concerning the preaccession financial assistance referred to in paragraph , first
subparagraph, and the ipa rural development component,
relating to financing decisions taken before accession, shall
continue to be applicable after the date of accession. they
shall be governed by the rules applying to the pre-accession
financial instruments. notwithstanding this, public procurement
procedures initiated after accession shall be carried out in
accordance with the relevant union directives.
. pre-accession funds to cover administrative expenditure, as
referred to in article , may be committed in the first two
years after accession. for audit and evaluation costs, preaccession funds may be committed up to five years after
accession.
article 
. for the first year after accession, the union shall provide
temporary financial assistance (hereinafter referred to as the
‘transition facility’) to croatia to develop and strengthen its
administrative and judicial capacity to implement and enforce
union law and to foster the exchange of best practice among
peers. that assistance shall fund institution-building projects
and limited small-scale investments ancillary thereto.
. assistance shall address the continued need for
strengthening institutional capacity in certain areas through
action which cannot be financed by the structural funds or
by the rural development funds.
. for twinning projects between public administrations for
the purpose of institution building, the procedure for call for
proposals through the network of contact points in the member
states shall continue to apply.
. the commitment appropriations for the transition
facility, at current prices, for croatia shall be eur  million
in total in  to address national and horizontal priorities.
. assistance under the transition facility shall be decided
and implemented in accordance with council regulation (ec)
no / or on the basis of other technical provisions
necessary for the operation of the transition facility, to be
adopted by the commission.
. particular attention shall be paid to ensuring appropriate
complementarity with the envisaged european social fund
support for administrative reform and institutional capacity.
article 
. a schengen facility (hereinafter referred to as ‘the
temporary schengen facility’) is hereby created as a temporary
instrument to help croatia between the date of accession and
the end of  to finance actions at the new external borders
of the union for the implementation of the schengen acquis and
external border control.
. for the period  july  to  december , the
following amounts (current prices) shall be made available to
croatia in the form of lump-sum payments under the
temporary schengen facility:
.. official en journal of the european union l /
(
) oj l , .., p. .
(
) oj l , .., p. .
(
) oj l , .., p. .
(million eur, current prices)
 
croatia  
. the annual amount for  shall be payable to croatia
on  july  and the annual amount for  shall be made
available on the first working day after  january .
. the lump-sum payments shall be used within three years
from the first payment. croatia shall submit, no later than six
months after expiry of this three-year period, a comprehensive
report on the final execution of the payments under the
temporary schengen facility with a statement justifying the
expenditure. any unused or unjustifiably spent funds shall be
recovered by the commission.
. the commission may adopt any technical provisions
necessary for the operation of the temporary schengen facility.
article 
. a cash-flow facility (hereinafter referred to as ‘the
temporary cash-flow facility’) is hereby created as a
temporary instrument to help croatia between the date of
accession and the end of  to improve cash-flow in the
national budget.
. for the period  july  to  december , the
following amounts (current prices) shall be made available to
croatia in the form of lump-sum payments under the
temporary cash-flow facility:
(million eur, current prices)
 
croatia  ,
. each annual amount shall be divided into equal monthly
instalments, payable on the first working day of each month.
article 
. an amount of eur , million (current prices) in
commitment appropriations shall be reserved for croatia
under the structural and cohesion funds in .
. one third of the amount referred to in paragraph  shall
be reserved for the cohesion fund.
. for the period covered by the next financial framework,
the amounts to be made available to croatia in commitment
appropriations under structural and cohesion funding shall be
calculated on the basis of the union acquis applicable at that
time. these amounts shall be adjusted in accordance with the
following phasing-in schedule:
—  % in ,
—  % in ,
—  % as of .
. insofar as the limits of the new union acquis allow, an
adjustment shall be made to ensure an increase of funds for
croatia in  of , times the  amount, and in 
of  times the  amount.
article 
. the total amount to be made available to croatia under
the european fisheries fund in  shall be eur , million
(current prices) in commitment appropriations.
. pre-financing under the european fisheries fund shall be
 % of the total amount referred to in paragraph  and shall
be paid in one instalment.
. for the period covered by the next financial framework,
the amounts to be made available to croatia in commitment
appropriations shall be calculated on the basis of the union
acquis applicable at that time. these amounts shall be adjusted
in accordance with the following phasing-in schedule:
—  % in ,
—  % in ,
—  % as of .
. insofar as the limits of the new union acquis allow, an
adjustment shall be made to ensure an increase of funds for
croatia in  of , times the  amount, and in 
of  times the  amount.
article 
. council regulation (ec) no / of  september
 on support for rural development by the european agricultural fund for rural development (eafrd) () shall not
apply to croatia for the whole programming period -
.
in the year , croatia shall be allocated eur , million
(current prices) under the rural development component
referred to in article  of council regulation (ec)
no /.
. temporary additional rural development measures for
croatia are laid out in annex vi.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
(
) oj l , .., p.  and oj l m, .., p. .
. the commission may, by means of implementing acts,
adopt rules necessary for the application of annex vi. those
implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the
procedure laid down in article () of council regulation
(ec) no / in conjunction with article ()(b) of
regulation (eu) no / of the european parliament and
of the council of  february  laying down the rules and
general principles concerning mechanisms for control by
member states of the commission's exercise of implementing
powers () or the relevant procedure as determined in the
applicable legislation.
. the council, acting on a proposal from the commission,
and after consulting the european parliament, shall make any
adaptations to annex vi, where necessary, to ensure coherence
with the regulations concerning rural development.
title iv
other provisions
article 
. the commission shall closely monitor all commitments
undertaken by croatia in the accession negotiations, including
those which must be achieved before or by the date of
accession. the commission's monitoring shall consist of
regularly updated monitoring tables, dialogue under the stabilisation and association agreement between the european
communities and their member states, of the one part, and
the republic of croatia, of the other part () (hereinafter
referred to as the ‘saa’), peer assessment missions, the preaccession economic programme, fiscal notifications and, when
necessary, early warning letters to the croatian authorities. in
the autumn of , the commission shall present a progress
report to the european parliament and the council. in the
autumn of , it shall present a comprehensive monitoring
report to the european parliament and the council.
throughout the monitoring process, the commission shall
also draw on input from member states and take into
consideration input from international and civil society organisations as appropriate.
the commission's monitoring shall focus in particular on
commitments undertaken by croatia in the area of the
judiciary and fundamental rights (annex vii), including the
continued development of track records on judicial reform
and efficiency, impartial handling of war crimes cases, and the
fight against corruption.
in addition, the commission's monitoring shall focus on the
area of freedom, security and justice, including the implementation and enforcement of union requirements with respect to
external border management, police cooperation, the fight
against organised crime, and judicial cooperation in civil and
criminal matters, as well as on commitments in the area of
competition policy, including the restructuring of the shipbuilding industry (annex viii) and of the steel sector (annex
ix).
as an integral part of its regular monitoring tables and reports,
the commission shall issue six-monthly assessments up to the
accession of croatia on the commitments undertaken by
croatia in these areas.
. the council, acting by qualified majority on a proposal
from the commission, may take all appropriate measures if
issues of concern are identified during the monitoring process.
the measures shall be maintained no longer than strictly
necessary and, in any case, shall be lifted by the council,
acting in accordance with the same procedure, when the
relevant issues of concern have been effectively addressed.
article 
. if, until the end of a period of up to three years after
accession, difficulties arise which are serious and liable to persist
in any sector of the economy or which could bring about
serious deterioration in the economic situation of a given
area, croatia may apply for authorisation to take protective
measures in order to rectify the situation and adjust the
sector concerned to the economy of the internal market.
in the same circumstances, any present member state may
apply for authorisation to take protective measures with
regard to croatia.
. upon request by the state concerned, the commission
shall, by emergency procedure, determine the protective
measures which it considers necessary, specifying the conditions
and arrangements applicable thereto.
in the event of serious economic difficulties and at the express
request of the member state concerned, the commission shall
act within five working days of the receipt of the request
accompanied by the relevant background information. the
measures thus decided on shall be applicable forthwith, shall
take into account the interest of all parties concerned and shall
not entail border controls.
. the measures authorised under this article may involve
derogations from the rules of the teu, the tfeu and this act to
such an extent and for such periods as are strictly necessary in
order to attain the objectives of this safeguard. priority shall be
given to measures which least disturb the functioning of the
internal market.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
(
 ( ) oj l , .., p. . ) oj l , .., p. .
article 
if croatia fails to fulfil commitments undertaken in the context
of the accession negotiations, including commitments in any
sectoral policy which concerns economic activities with a
cross-border effect, thereby causing a serious breach of the
functioning of the internal market or a threat to the union's
financial interests or an imminent risk of such a breach or
threat, the commission may, until the end of a period of up
to three years after accession, upon reasoned request of a
member state or on its own initiative, take appropriate
measures.
these measures shall be proportionate and priority shall be
given to measures which least disturb the functioning of the
internal market and, where appropriate, to the application of
the existing sectoral safeguard mechanisms. the safeguard
measures under this article shall not be invoked as a means
of arbitrary discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade
between member states. the safeguard clause may be invoked
even before accession on the basis of the monitoring findings
and the measures adopted shall enter into force on the date of
accession unless they provide for a later date. the measures
shall be maintained no longer than strictly necessary and, in
any case, shall be lifted when the relevant commitment has
been fulfilled. they may, however, be applied beyond the
period referred to in the first paragraph as long as the
relevant commitments have not been fulfilled. in response to
progress made by croatia in fulfilling its commitments, the
commission may adapt the measures as appropriate. the
commission shall inform the council in good time before
revoking the safeguard measures, and it shall take duly into
account any observations of the council in this respect.
article 
if there are serious shortcomings or any imminent risk of such
shortcomings in croatia in the transposition or state of implementation of acts adopted by the institutions pursuant to part
three, title v of the tfeu as well as of acts adopted by the
institutions before the entry into force of the treaty of lisbon
pursuant to title vi of the teu or pursuant to part three, title
iv of the treaty establishing the european community, the
commission may, until the end of a period of up to three
years after accession, upon the reasoned request of a member
state or on its own initiative and after consulting the member
states, adopt appropriate measures and specify the conditions
and arrangements applicable thereto.
these measures may take the form of a temporary suspension
of the application of relevant provisions and decisions in the
relations between croatia and any other member state or
member states, without prejudice to the continuation of close
judicial cooperation. the safeguard clause may be invoked even
before accession on the basis of the monitoring findings and the
measures adopted shall enter into force on the date of accession
unless they provide for a later date. the measures shall be
maintained no longer than strictly necessary and, in any case,
shall be lifted when the shortcomings are remedied. they may,
however, be applied beyond the period referred to in the first
paragraph as long as these shortcomings persist. in response to
progress made by croatia in rectifying the identified shortcomings, the commission may adapt the measures as appropriate after consulting the member states. the commission shall
inform the council in good time before revoking the safeguard
measures, and it shall take duly into account any observations
of the council in this respect.
article 
in order not to hamper the proper functioning of the internal
market, the enforcement of croatia's national rules during the
transitional periods referred to in annex v shall not lead to
border controls between member states.
article 
if transitional measures are necessary to facilitate the transition
from the existing regime in croatia to that resulting from the
application of the common agricultural policy under the
conditions set out in this act, they shall be adopted by the
commission in accordance with the procedure referred to in
article () of council regulation (ec) no / of
 october  establishing a common organisation of agricultural markets and on specific provisions for certain agricultural products (single cmo regulation) () in conjunction
with article ()(b) of european parliament and council regulation (eu) no / () or the relevant procedure as
determined in the applicable legislation. they may be adopted
within a period of three years from the date of accession and
their application shall be limited to that period. the council,
acting unanimously on a proposal from the commission and
after consulting the european parliament, may extend this
period.
transitional measures referred to in the first paragraph may also
be adopted prior to the date of accession, if necessary. such
measures shall be adopted by the council acting by qualified
majority on a proposal from the commission or, where they
affect instruments initially adopted by the commission, they
shall be adopted by the commission in accordance with the
procedures required for adopting the instruments in question.
article 
if transitional measures are necessary to facilitate the transition
from the existing regime in croatia to that resulting from the
application of the union veterinary, phytosanitary and food
safety rules, such measures shall be adopted by the commission
in accordance with the relevant procedure as determined in the
applicable legislation. these measures shall be adopted within a
period of three years from the date of accession and their
application shall be limited to that period.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
(
) oj l , .., p. .
(
) oj l , .., p. .
article 
the council, acting by qualified majority on a proposal from the commission, shall define the terms under
which:
(a) the requirement for an exit summary declaration may be waived for the products referred to in
article () of the tfeu leaving the territory of croatia to cross the territory of bosnia and herzegovina at neum (‘neum corridor’);
(b) the requirement for an entry summary declaration may be waived for the products falling within the
scope of point (a) when they re-enter the territory of croatia after having crossed the territory of bosnia
and herzegovina at neum.
article 
the commission may take all appropriate measures to ensure that the necessary statutory staff is maintained in croatia for a maximum of  months following accession. during this period, officials, temporary
staff and contract staff assigned to posts in croatia before accession and who are required to remain in
service in croatia after the date of accession shall benefit from the same financial and material conditions as
were applied before accession in accordance with the staff regulations of officials of the european communities and the conditions of employment of other servants of the european communities laid down in
council regulation (eec, euratom, ecsc) no / (). the administrative expenditure, including salaries
for other necessary staff, shall be covered by the general budget of the european union.
part five
provisions relating to the implementation of this act
title i
adaptations to the rules of procedure of the institutions and to the rules and rules
of procedure of the committees
article 
the institutions shall, in accordance with the respective procedures provided for in the original treaties,
make such adaptations to their rules of procedure as are rendered necessary by accession.
adaptations to the rules of the committees established by the original treaties and to their rules of
procedure which are rendered necessary by accession shall be made as soon as possible after accession.
title ii
applicability of the acts of the institutions
article 
upon accession, croatia shall be considered as being an addressee, in accordance with the original treaties,
of directives and decisions within the meaning of article  of the tfeu. except with regard to directives
and decisions which have entered into force pursuant to the third subparagraph of article () and the
second subparagraph of article () of the tfeu, croatia shall be considered as having received notification of such directives and decisions upon accession.
article 
. croatia shall put into effect the measures necessary for it to comply, from the date of accession, with
the provisions of directives and decisions within the meaning of article  of the tfeu, unless another
time limit is provided for in this act. croatia shall communicate those measures to the commission by the
date of accession or, where later, by the time limit provided for in this act.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
(
) oj l , .., p. .
. to the extent that amendments to directives within the
meaning of article  of the tfeu introduced by this act
require modification of the laws, regulations or administrative
provisions of the present member states, the present member
states shall put into effect the measures necessary to comply,
from the date of accession of croatia, with the amended directives, unless another time limit is provided for in this act. they
shall communicate those measures to the commission by the
date of accession or, where later, by the time limit provided for
in this act.
article 
provisions laid down by legislation, regulation or administrative
action designed to ensure the protection of the health of
workers and the general public in the territory of croatia
against the dangers arising from ionising radiations shall, in
accordance with article  of the eaec treaty, be
communicated by croatia to the commission within three
months from accession.
article 
at the duly substantiated request of croatia, submitted to the
commission no later than the date of accession, the council,
acting on a proposal from the commission, or the commission,
if the original act was adopted by the commission, may take
measures consisting of temporary derogations from acts
adopted by the institutions between  july  and the date
of accession. the measures shall be adopted according to the
voting rules governing the adoption of the act from which a
temporary derogation is sought. where those derogations are
adopted after accession, they may be applied as of the date of
accession.
article 
where acts of the institutions adopted prior to accession require
adaptation by reason of accession, and the necessary adaptations have not been provided for in this act or its annexes,
the council, acting by qualified majority on a proposal from the
commission, or the commission, if the original act was
adopted by the commission, shall, to this end, adopt the
necessary acts. where those acts are adopted after accession,
they may be applied as of the date of accession.
article 
unless otherwise stipulated in this act, the council, acting by
qualified majority on a proposal from the commission, shall
adopt the necessary measures to implement the provisions of
this act.
article 
the texts of the acts of the institutions adopted before accession
and drawn up by these institutions in the croatian language
shall, from the date of accession, be authentic under the same
conditions as the texts drawn up in the present official
languages. they shall be published in the official journal of the
european union if the texts in the present official languages were
so published.
title iii
final provisions
article 
annexes i to ix, the appendices thereto and the protocol are an
integral part of this act.
article 
the government of the italian republic shall transmit to the
government of the republic of croatia a certified copy of the
treaty on european union, the treaty on the functioning of the
european union and the treaty establishing the european
atomic energy community, and the treaties amending or
supplementing them, including the treaty concerning the
accession of the kingdom of denmark, ireland and the
united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland, the
treaty concerning the accession of the hellenic republic, the
treaty concerning the accession of the kingdom of spain and
the portuguese republic, the treaty concerning the accession of
the republic of austria, the republic of finland and the
kingdom of sweden, the treaty concerning the accession of
the czech republic, the republic of estonia, the republic of
cyprus, the republic of latvia, the republic of lithuania, the
republic of hungary, the republic of malta, the republic of
poland, the republic of slovenia and the slovak republic and
the treaty concerning the accession of the republic of bulgaria
and romania, in the bulgarian, czech, danish, dutch, english,
estonian, finnish, french, german, greek, hungarian, irish,
italian, latvian, lithuanian, maltese, polish, portuguese,
romanian, slovak, slovenian, spanish and swedish languages.
the texts of the treaties referred to in the first paragraph,
drawn up in the croatian language, shall be annexed to this
act. those texts shall be authentic under the same conditions as
the texts of those treaties, drawn up in the present official
languages.
article 
a certified copy of the international agreements deposited in
the archives of the general secretariat of the council shall be
transmitted to the government of the republic of croatia by
the secretary-general.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
annex i
list of conventions and protocols to which the republic of croatia accedes upon accession (referred to in
article () of the act of accession)
. convention of  july  on the elimination of double taxation in connection with the adjustment of profits of
associated enterprises (oj l , .., p. )
— convention of  december  on the accession of the republic of austria, the republic of finland and the
kingdom of sweden to the convention on the elimination of double taxation in connection with the adjustment
of profits of associated enterprises (oj c , .., p. )
— protocol of  may  amending the convention of  july  on the elimination of double taxation in
connection with the adjustment of profits of associated enterprises (oj c , .., p. )
— convention of  december  on the accession of the czech republic, the republic of estonia, the republic of
cyprus, the republic of latvia, the republic of lithuania, the republic of hungary, the republic of malta, the
republic of poland, the republic of slovenia and the slovak republic to the convention on the elimination of
double taxation in connection with the adjustment of profits of associated enterprises (oj c , .., p. )
. convention of  july , drawn up on the basis of article k. of the treaty on european union, on the protection
of the european communities' financial interests (oj c , .., p. )
— protocol of  september , drawn up on the basis of article k. of the treaty on european union, to the
convention on the protection of the european communities' financial interests (oj c , .., p. )
— protocol of  november , drawn up on the basis of article k. of the treaty on european union, on the
interpretation, by way of preliminary rulings, by the court of justice of the european communities of the
convention on the protection of the european communities' financial interests (oj c , .., p. )
— second protocol of  june , drawn up on the basis of article k. of the treaty on european union, to the
convention on the protection of the european communities' financial interests (oj c , .., p. )
. convention of  may , drawn up on the basis of article k.()(c) of the treaty on european union, on the fight
against corruption involving officials of the european communities or officials of member states of the european
union (oj c , .., p. )
. convention of  december , drawn up on the basis of article k. of the treaty on european union, on mutual
assistance and cooperation between customs administrations (oj c , .., p. )
. convention of  june , drawn up on the basis of article k. of the treaty on european union, on driving
disqualifications (oj c , .., p. )
. convention of  may , established by the council in accordance with article  of the treaty on european
union, on mutual assistance in criminal matters between the member states of the european union
(oj c , .., p. )
— protocol of  october , established by the council in accordance with article  of the treaty on european
union, to the convention on mutual assistance in criminal matters between the member states of the european
union (oj c , .., p. )
.. official en journal of the european union l /
annex ii
list of provisions of the schengen acquis as integrated into the framework of the european union and the acts
building upon it or otherwise related to it, to be binding on, and applicable in, the republic of croatia as of
accession (referred to in article () of the act of accession)
. the agreement between the governments of the states of the benelux economic union, the federal republic of
germany and the french republic on the gradual abolition of checks at their common borders dated  june  ().
. the following provisions of the convention signed in schengen on  june  implementing the schengen
agreement of  june  on the gradual abolition of checks at their common borders, its related final act and
joint declarations (), as amended by certain of the acts listed in paragraph  of this annex:
article  to the extent that it relates to the provisions of this paragraph; article ; article ; articles  to  (with
the exception of article () and article (a)), article , articles  to ; article (); articles  to ; articles
 and ; articles  and ; article ; article ; articles  to  to the extent that they relate to the
provisions of this paragraph; and article ; joint declarations  and  of the final act.
. the following provisions of the agreements on accession to the convention signed in schengen on  june 
implementing the schengen agreement of  june  on the gradual abolition of checks at their common borders,
their final acts and the related declarations, as amended by certain of the acts listed in paragraph  of this annex:
(a) the agreement signed on  december  on the accession of the kingdom of denmark:
— article () and article ;
(b) the agreement signed on  december  on the accession of the republic of finland:
— article ,
— declaration by the government of the republic of finland on the åland islands in part iii of the final act;
(c) the agreement signed on  december  on the accession of the kingdom of sweden:
— article .
. the following agreements and arrangements which build upon the schengen acquis or otherwise relate to it:
— the agreement of  may  concluded by the council of the european union and the republic of iceland and
the kingdom of norway concerning the latters' association with the implementation, application and development
of the schengen acquis, including the annexes, its final act, declarations and the exchanges of letters annexed
thereto, approved by council decision //ec (oj l , .., p. )
— the agreement of  june  concluded by the council of the european union and the republic of iceland and
the kingdom of norway on the establishment of rights and obligations between ireland and the united kingdom
of great britain and northern ireland, on the one hand, and the republic of iceland and the kingdom of norway,
on the other, in areas of the schengen acquis which apply to these states, approved by council decision
//ec (oj l , .., p. )
— the agreement between the european union, the european community and the swiss confederation on the swiss
confederation's association with the implementation, application and development of the schengen acquis, signed
on  october  and approved by council decision //ec and council decision //jha (oj
l , .., p.  and p. )
— the protocol between the european union, the european community, the swiss confederation and the principality
of liechtenstein on the accession of the principality of liechtenstein to the agreement between the european
union, the european community and the swiss confederation on the swiss confederation's association with the
implementation, application and development of the schengen acquis, signed on  february  and approved
by council decision //eu and council decision //eu (oj l , .., p.  and p. )
l / en official journal of the european union ..
(
) oj l , .., p. .
(
) oj l , .., p. .
— the arrangement between the european community and the republic of iceland and the kingdom of norway on
the modalities of the participation by those states in the european agency for the management of operational
cooperation at the external borders of the member states of the european union, including the joint declaration
annexed thereto, signed on  february  and approved by council decision //ec (oj l ,
.., p. )
— the arrangement between the european community, of the one part, and the swiss confederation and the
principality of liechtenstein, of the other part, on the modalities of the participation by those states in the
european agency for the management of operational cooperation at the external borders of the member
states of the european union, including the annex and joint declarations annexed thereto, signed on
 september  and approved by council decision //eu (oj l , .., p. )
— the agreement between the european community and the republic of iceland, the kingdom of norway, the swiss
confederation and the principality of liechtenstein on supplementary rules in relation to the external borders fund
for the period  to , including the declarations annexed thereto, signed on  march  and approved
by council decision //eu (oj l , .., p. ) ().
. the provisions of the following decisions (see oj l , .., p. ) of the executive committee established by
the convention signed in schengen on  june  implementing the schengen agreement of  june  on the
gradual abolition of checks at their common borders, as amended by certain of the acts listed in paragraph  of this
annex:
— sch/com-ex ()  decision of the executive committee of  december  concerning the declarations by
the ministers and state secretaries
— sch/com-ex ()  decision of the executive committee of  december  on improving practical judicial
cooperation for combating drug trafficking
— sch/com-ex ()  rev decision of the executive committee of  november  on the acquisition of
common entry and exit stamps
— sch/com-ex ()  rev decision of the executive committee of  december  on the certificate provided
for in article  to carry narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances
— sch/com-ex ()  rev  decision of the executive committee of  december  on bringing into force the
convention implementing the schengen agreement of  june 
— sch/com-ex ()  decision of the executive committee of  december  on the swift exchange between
the schengen states of statistical and specific data on possible malfunctions at the external borders
— sch/com-ex ()  rev  decision of the executive committee of  april  on the activities of the task
force, insofar as it relates to the provisions in paragraph  of this annex
— sch/com-ex ()  def decision of the executive committee of  september  setting up a standing
committee on the evaluation and implementation of schengen
— sch/com-ex ()  def  decision of the executive committee of  october  on the adoption of measures
to fight illegal immigration, insofar as it relates to the provisions in paragraph  of this annex
— sch/com-ex ()  decision of the executive committee of  december  on the handbook on crossborder police-cooperation, insofar as it relates to the provisions in paragraph  of this annex
— sch/com-ex ()  rev decision of the executive committee of  december  on coordinated deployment
of document advisers
— sch/com-ex ()  rev  decision of the executive committee of  april  on the drugs situation
— sch/com-ex ()  decision of the executive committee of  april  on the schengen acquis relating to
telecommunications
— sch/com-ex ()  rev  decision of the executive committee of  april  on liaison officers
.. official en journal of the european union l /
(
) as long as that agreement is not yet concluded, only insofar as it applies provisionally.
— sch/com-ex ()  rev  decision of the executive committee of  april  on general principles governing
the payment of informers
— sch/com-ex ()  decision of the executive committee of  april  on the illegal trade in firearms.
. the following declarations (see oj l , .., p. ) of the executive committee established by the convention
signed in schengen on  june  implementing the schengen agreement of  june  on the gradual
abolition of checks at their common borders, to the extent that they relate to the provisions in paragraph  of
this annex:
— sch/com-ex () decl  rev  declaration of the executive committee of  june  on extradition
— sch/com-ex () decl  rev  declaration of the executive committee of  february  on the abduction of
minors.
. the following decisions (see oj l , .., p. ) of the central group established by the convention signed in
schengen on  june  implementing the schengen agreement of  june  on the gradual abolition of
checks at their common borders, to the extent that they relate to the provisions in paragraph  of this annex:
— sch/c ()  decision of the central group of  october  on the adoption of measures to fight illegal
immigration
— sch/c ()  decision of the central group of  march  on general principles governing the payment of
informers.
. the following acts which build upon the schengen acquis or otherwise relate to it:
— council regulation (ec) no / of  may  laying down a uniform format for visas (oj l ,
.., p. )
— council decision //ec of  may  laying down the detailed arrangements for the integration of the
schengen secretariat into the general secretariat of the council (oj l , .., p. )
— council decision //ec of  may  concerning the definition of the schengen acquis for the purpose
of determining, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the treaty establishing the european community and
the treaty on european union, the legal basis for each of the provisions or decisions which constitute the acquis
(oj l , .., p. )
— council decision //ec of  may  determining, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the
treaty establishing the european community and the treaty on european union, the legal basis for each of the
provisions or decisions which constitute the schengen acquis (oj l , .., p. )
— council decision //ec of  may  on certain arrangements for the application of the agreement
concluded by the council of the european union and the republic of iceland and the kingdom of norway
concerning the association of those two states with the implementation, application and development of the
schengen acquis (oj l , .., p. )
— council decision //ec of  december  on the full application of the schengen acquis in greece
(oj l , .., p. )
— council decision //ec of  may  concerning the request of the united kingdom of great britain
and northern ireland to take part in some of the provisions of the schengen acquis (oj l , .., p. )
— council decision //jha of  september  establishing a procedure for amending articles () and
(), () and () of the convention implementing the schengen agreement of  june  on the gradual
abolition of checks at common borders (oj l , .., p. )
— council decision //ec of  december  on the application of the schengen acquis in denmark,
finland and sweden, and in iceland and norway (oj l , .., p. )
— council regulation (ec) no / of  march  listing the third countries whose nationals must be in
possession of visas when crossing the external borders and those whose nationals are exempt from that
requirement (oj l , .., p. )
l / en official journal of the european union ..
— council directive //ec of  june  supplementing the provisions of article  of the convention
implementing the schengen agreement of  june  (oj l , .., p. )
— council regulation (ec) no / of  february  on a uniform format for forms for affixing the visa
issued by member states to persons holding travel documents not recognised by the member state drawing up the
form (oj l , .., p. )
— council decision //ec of  february  concerning ireland's request to take part in some of the
provisions of the schengen acquis (oj l , .., p. )
— council regulation (ec) no / of  june  laying down a uniform format for residence permits for
third-country nationals (oj l , .., p. )
— council framework decision //jha of  november  on the strengthening of the penal framework
to prevent the facilitation of unauthorised entry, transit and residence (oj l , .., p. )
— council directive //ec of  november  defining the facilitation of unauthorised entry, transit and
residence (oj l , .., p. )
— council decision //jha of  february  on the common use of liaison officers posted abroad by the
law enforcement agencies of the member states (oj l , .., p. )
— council decision //jha of  october  amending the provisions of article () and () of the
convention implementing the schengen agreement of  june  on the gradual abolition of checks at
common borders (oj l , .., p. )
— council directive //ec of  november  on assistance in cases of transit for the purposes of
removal by air (oj l , .., p. )
— council regulation (ec) no / of  february  on the creation of an immigration liaison officers
network (oj l , .., p. )
— council directive //ec of  april  on the obligation of carriers to communicate passenger data
(oj l , .., p. )
— council decision //ec of  april  on the organisation of joint flights for removals from the
territory of two or more member states, of third-country nationals who are subjects of individual removal orders
(oj l , .., p. )
— council decision //ec of  june  establishing the visa information system (vis) (oj l ,
.., p.  and oj l m, .., p. )
— council regulation (ec) no / of  october  establishing a european agency for the management
of operational cooperation at the external borders of the member states of the european union (oj l ,
.., p.  and oj l m, .., p. )
— council regulation (ec) no / of  december  on standards for security features and biometrics in
passports and travel documents issued by member states (oj l , .., p.  and oj l m, ..,
p. )
— council decision //ec of  december  on the putting into effect of parts of the schengen acquis by
the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland (oj l , .., p. )
— council decision //ec of  march  establishing a secure web-based information and coordination
network for member states' migration management services (oj l , .., p.  and oj l m,
.., p. )
.. official en journal of the european union l /
— regulation (ec) no / of the european parliament and of the council of  march  establishing a
community code on the rules governing the movement of persons across borders (schengen borders code)
(oj l , .., p. ), except the first sentence of article , article ()(a), title iii and the provisions
of title ii and the annexes thereto referring to the schengen information system (sis)
— council framework decision //jha of  december  on simplifying the exchange of information
and intelligence between law enforcement authorities of the member states of the european union (oj l ,
.., p. )
— regulation (ec) no / of the european parliament and of the council of  december  laying down
rules on local border traffic at the external land borders of the member states and amending the provisions of the
schengen convention (oj l , .., p. ), except articles (b) and (c)
— council decision //ec of  june  on the application of the provisions of the schengen acquis
relating to the schengen information system in the czech republic, the republic of estonia, the republic of latvia,
the republic of lithuania, the republic of hungary, the republic of malta, the republic of poland, the republic of
slovenia and the slovak republic (oj l , .., p. )
— regulation (ec) no / of the european parliament and of the council of  july  establishing a
mechanism for the creation of rapid border intervention teams and amending council regulation (ec)
no / as regards that mechanism and regulating the tasks and powers of guest officers (oj l ,
.., p. ), except the provisions of article () and () to the extent that they refer to access being
given to the schengen information system
— council decision //ec of  december  on the full application of the provisions of the schengen
acquis in the czech republic, the republic of estonia, the republic of latvia, the republic of lithuania, the
republic of hungary, the republic of malta, the republic of poland, the republic of slovenia and the slovak
republic (oj l , .., p. )
— council decision //ec of  june  on the application of the provisions of the schengen acquis relating
to the schengen information system in the swiss confederation (oj l , .., p. )
— article  of council decision //jha of  june  concerning access for consultation of the visa
information system (vis) by designated authorities of member states and by europol for the purposes of the
prevention, detection and investigation of terrorist offences and of other serious criminal offences (oj l ,
.., p. )
— council decision //ec of  november  on the full application of the provisions of the schengen
acquis in the swiss confederation (oj l , .., p. )
— council framework decision //jha of  november  on the protection of personal data processed
in the framework of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters (oj l , .., p. )
— directive //ec of the european parliament and of the council of  december  on common
standards and procedures in member states for returning illegally staying third-country nationals (oj l ,
.., p. )
— article  of regulation (ec) no / of the european parliament and of the council of  july 
establishing a community code on visas (visa code) (oj l , .., p. )
— council decision //eu of  april  supplementing the schengen borders code as regards the
surveillance of the sea external borders in the context of operational cooperation coordinated by the european
agency for the management of operational cooperation at the external borders of the member states of the
european union (oj l , .., p. )
— council decision //eu of  june  on the application of the provisions of the schengen acquis
relating to the schengen information system in the republic of bulgaria and romania (oj l , .., p. ).
l / en official journal of the european union ..
annex iii
list referred to in article  of the act of accession: adaptations to acts adopted by the institutions
. freedom to provide services
 l : directive //ec of the european parliament and of the council of  september  on the
recognition of professional qualifications (oj l , .., p. ).
(a) article () is replaced by the following:
‘. without prejudice to article b, each member state shall recognise evidence of formal qualifications as doctor
giving access to the professional activities of doctor with basic training and specialised doctor, as nurse responsible for
general care, as dental practitioner, as specialised dental practitioner, as veterinary surgeon, as midwife, as pharmacist
and as architect held by nationals of the member states and issued by the former yugoslavia, or whose training
commenced,
(a) for slovenia, before  june ; and
(b) for croatia, before  october ;
where the authorities of the aforementioned member states attest that such evidence has the same legal validity within
their territory as the evidence which they issue and, with respect to architects, as the evidence of formal qualifications
specified for those member states in annex vi, point , as regards access to the professional activities of doctor with
basic training, specialised doctor, nurse responsible for general care, dental practitioner, specialised dental practitioner,
veterinary surgeon, midwife, pharmacist with respect to the activities referred to in article (), and architect with
respect to the activities referred to in article , and the pursuit of such activities.
such an attestation must be accompanied by a certificate issued by those same authorities stating that such persons
have effectively and lawfully been engaged in the activities in question within their territory for at least three
consecutive years during the five years prior to the date of issue of the certificate.’.
(b) the following article is inserted:
‘article b
acquired rights in midwifery shall not apply to the following qualifications which were obtained in croatia before
 july : viša medicinska sestra ginekološko-opstetričkog smjera (high gynaecology-obstetrical nurse), medicinska sestra ginekološko-opstetričkog smjera (gynaecology-obstetrical nurse), viša medicinska sestra primaljskog
smjera (high nurse with midwifery degree), medicinska sestra primaljskog smjera (nurse with midwifery degree),
ginekološko-opstetrička primalja (gynaecology-obstetrical midwife) and primalja (midwife).’.
. intellectual property law
i. community trade mark
 r : council regulation (ec) no / of  february  on the community trade mark (oj l ,
.., p. ).
article () is replaced by the following:
‘. as of the date of accession of bulgaria, the czech republic, estonia, croatia, cyprus, latvia, lithuania,
hungary, malta, poland, romania, slovenia and slovakia (hereinafter referred to as “new member state(s)”), a
community trade mark registered or applied for pursuant to this regulation before their respective date of
accession shall be extended to the territory of those member states in order to have equal effect throughout the
community.’.
ii. supplementary protection certificates
.  r : regulation (ec) no / of the european parliament and of the council of  july 
concerning the creation of a supplementary protection certificate for plant protection products (oj l ,
.., p. ).
(a) the following point is added to article a:
‘(m) any plant protection product protected by a valid basic patent and for which the first authorisation to place it
on the market as a plant protection product was obtained after  january  may be granted a certificate
in croatia, provided that the application for a certificate is lodged within six months from the date of
accession.’.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
(b) article () is replaced by the following:
‘. this regulation shall apply to supplementary protection certificates granted in accordance with the national
legislation of the czech republic, estonia, croatia, cyprus, latvia, lithuania, malta, poland, romania, slovenia and
slovakia prior to their respective date of accession.’.
.  r : regulation (ec) no / of the european parliament and of the council of  may 
concerning the supplementary protection certificate for medicinal products (oj l , .., p. ).
(a) the following point is added to article :
‘(m) any medicinal product protected by a valid basic patent and for which the first authorisation to place it on
the market as a medicinal product was obtained after  january  may be granted a certificate in croatia,
provided that the application for a certificate is lodged within six months from the date of accession.’.
(b) article () is replaced by the following:
‘. this regulation shall apply to supplementary protection certificates granted in accordance with the national
legislation of the czech republic, estonia, croatia, cyprus, latvia, lithuania, malta, poland, romania, slovenia and
slovakia prior to their respective date of accession.’.
iii. community designs
 r : council regulation (ec) no / of  december  on community designs (oj l ,
.., p. ).
article a() is replaced by the following:
‘. as of the date of accession of bulgaria, the czech republic, estonia, croatia, cyprus, latvia, lithuania,
hungary, malta, poland, romania, slovenia and slovakia (hereinafter referred to as “new member state(s)”), a
community design protected or applied for pursuant to this regulation before their respective date of accession
shall be extended to the territory of those member states in order to have equal effect throughout the community.’.
. financial services
 l : directive //ec of the european parliament and of the council of  june  relating to the
taking up and pursuit of the business of credit institutions (recast) (oj l , .., p. ).
in article , the following is inserted after the entry for france:
‘— in croatia, the “kreditne unije” and the “hrvatska banka za obnovu i razvitak”,’.
. agriculture
.  r : council regulation (eec) no / of  june  laying down general rules on the definition,
description and presentation of aromatized wines, aromatized wine-based drinks and aromatized wine-product
cocktails (oj l , .., p. ).
in annex ii, the following is inserted after the geographical designation ‘nürnberger glühwein’:
‘samoborski bermet’
.  r : council regulation (ec) no / of  october  establishing a common organisation of
agricultural markets and on specific provisions for certain agricultural products (single cmo regulation) (oj l ,
.., p. ).
(a) in article , the following paragraph is inserted:
‘a. for croatia a special restructuring reserve shall be established as set out in point  of annex ix. this
reserve shall be released as of  april of the first quota year after accession to the extent that the on-farm
consumption of milk and milk products in croatia has decreased in the period -.
the decision on releasing the reserve and of its distribution to the deliveries and direct sales quota shall be taken
by the commission in accordance with the procedure referred to in article () on the basis of an assessment
of a report to be submitted by croatia by  december . that report shall detail the results and trends of the
actual restructuring process in croatia's dairy sector, and in particular the shift from production for on-farm
consumption to production for the market.’.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
(b) in article k(), the following subparagraph is added:
‘this paragraph shall not apply to croatia for the financial year . croatia shall submit to the commission a
draft five-year support programme for the - programme period.’.
(c) in annex iii, part ii, point  is replaced by the following:
‘. “full-time refiner” means a production unit:
— of which the sole activity consists of refining imported raw cane sugar,
or
— which refined in the marketing year / a quantity of at least   tonnes of imported raw
cane sugar. for the purpose of this indent, in the case of croatia the marketing year shall be that of
/.’.
(d) annex vi is replaced by the following:
‘annex vi
national and regional quotas
from the / marketing year onwards
(in tonnes)
member states or regions sugar isoglucose inulin syrup
belgium  ,  , 
bulgaria   ,
czech republic  ,
denmark  ,
germany   ,  ,
ireland 
greece  , 
spain  ,  ,
france
(metropolitan)
  , 
french overseas departments
 ,
croatia  ,
italy  ,  ,
latvia 
lithuania  ,
hungary  ,  ,
netherlands  ,  
austria  ,
poland   ,  ,
.. official en journal of the european union l /
(in tonnes)
member states or regions sugar isoglucose inulin syrup
portugal
(mainland)
  ,
autonomous region of
the azores
 ,
romania  , 
slovenia 
slovakia  ,  ,
finland  , 
sweden  ,
united kingdom   , 
total   ,  , ’
(e) in annex ix, point , the following is inserted after the entry for france:
‘member state / / / / / / /
croatia    ’
(f) in annex ix, point , the table is replaced by the following:
‘member state tonnes
bulgaria  
croatia  
romania  ’
(g) in annex x, the following is inserted after the entry for france:
‘croatia ,’
(h) in annex xb, the following table is added:
(thousand eur)
‘budget year     from  onwards
hr         ’
(i) in paragraph  of the appendix to annex xib, the following point is added:
‘(h) in croatia, the areas planted with vines in the following sub-regions: moslavina, prigorje-bilogora, plešivica,
pokuplje and zagorje-međimurje.’.
(j) in paragraph  of the appendix to annex xib, the following point is added:
‘(h) in croatia, areas planted with vines in the following sub-regions: hrvatsko podunavlje and slavonija.’.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
(k) in paragraph  of the appendix to annex xib, the following point is added:
‘(g) in croatia, areas planted with vines in the following sub-regions: hrvatska istra, hrvatsko primorje, dalmatinska zagora, sjeverna dalmacija and srednja i južna dalmacija.’.
.  r : regulation (ec) no / of the european parliament and of the council of  january  on
the definition, description, presentation, labelling and the protection of geographical indications of spirit drinks and
repealing council regulation (eec) no / (oj l , .., p. ).
(a) in article , the following paragraph is added:
‘. the deadline referred to in paragraph  for submission of technical files shall also apply to the geographical
indications of croatia listed in annex iii.’.
(b) in annex iii, point , the following geographical indications are added:
‘hrvatska loza croatia
hrvatska stara šljivovica croatia
slavonska šljivovica croatia’
(c) in annex iii, point , the following geographical indication is added:
‘hrvatski pelinkovac croatia’
(d) in annex iii, the following point is inserted:
‘. maraschino/marrasquino/
maraskino
zadarski maraschino croatia’
(e) in annex iii, under product category ‘other spirit drinks’, the following geographical indication is added:
‘hrvatska travarica croatia’
.  r : council regulation (ec) no / of  january  establishing common rules for direct
support schemes for farmers under the common agricultural policy and establishing certain support schemes for
farmers, amending regulations (ec) no /, (ec) no /, (ec) no / and repealing regulation
(ec) no / (oj l , .., p. ).
(a) article (g) is replaced by the following:
‘(g) “new member states” means bulgaria, the czech republic, estonia, croatia, cyprus, latvia, lithuania,
hungary, malta, poland, romania, slovenia and slovakia;’.
(b) in article (), the first subparagraph is replaced by the following:
‘. the member states other than the new member states shall ensure that land which was under permanent
pasture at the date provided for the area aid applications for  is maintained under permanent pasture. the
new member states other than bulgaria, croatia and romania shall ensure that land which was under permanent
pasture on  may  is maintained under permanent pasture. bulgaria and romania shall ensure that land
which was under permanent pasture on  january  is maintained under permanent pasture. croatia shall
ensure that land which was under permanent pasture on  july  is maintained under permanent pasture.’.
(c) article ()(b)(iv) is replaced by the following:
‘(iv) pursuant to article (), articles a and , the third subparagraph of article (), article  and
article ()(c).’.
(d) in article (), the following subparagraph is added:
‘croatia may decide to make use of the options provided for in article  and article () of this regulation.
that decision shall be notified to the commission by  july .’.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
(e) in article (), the following subparagraph is added:
‘by way of derogation from the second subparagraph, in the case of croatia, this ceiling is determined on the basis
of the national ceilings set out in articles () and () as regards respectively sheepmeat and goatmeat
payments and beef and veal payments referred to in articles  and , taking into account the schedule of
introduction of direct payments laid down in article .’.
(f) in article , the following paragraph is inserted after the first paragraph:
‘by way of derogation from the first paragraph, croatia may retain up to  % of the amount resulting from the
ceiling referred to in the third subparagraph of article () of this regulation in order to make, on a yearly
basis, an additional payment to farmers.’.
(g) in article (), the following subparagraph is inserted after the first subparagraph:
‘by way of derogation from the first subparagraph, croatia may retain all or part of the amount resulting from the
ceiling referred to in the third subparagraph of article () of this regulation in order to make, on a yearly
basis, an additional payment to farmers.’.
(h) the title of chapter  of title iii is replaced by the following:
‘implementation in the new member states having applied the single area payment scheme and in croatia’.
(i) the title of article  is replaced by the following:
‘introduction of the single payment scheme in the member states having applied the single area payment scheme and in
croatia’.
(j) in article (), the first subparagraph is replaced by the following:
‘. save as otherwise provided for in this chapter, this title shall apply to the new member states having
applied the single area payment scheme provided for in chapter  of title v and to croatia.’.
(k) in article (), the following sentence is added:
‘for croatia this reduction shall not be higher than  % of the annual ceiling as indicated in table  of annex
viii.’.
(l) in article (), the following sentences are added:
‘in croatia, the use of the national reserve shall be subject to authorisation by the commission by means of an
implementing act without the assistance of the committee referred to in article . the commission shall
examine, in particular, the establishment of any national direct payment scheme applicable prior to the date of
accession and the conditions under which it applied. the request to authorise the national reserve shall be sent by
croatia to the commission by  july .’.
(m) the following article is inserted:
‘article a
special national de-mining reserve in croatia
. croatia shall create a special national de-mining reserve which shall be used for the purpose of allocating,
during a period of ten years after accession and in accordance with objective criteria and in such a way as to
ensure equal treatment between farmers and to avoid market and competition distortions, payment entitlements
to farmers with de-mined land returning to use for agricultural activities.
. land eligible for allocation of payment entitlements under this article shall not be eligible for allocation of
payment entitlements under articles  and .
. the value of the payment entitlements established under this article shall not be higher than the value of
the payment entitlements established in accordance with articles  and , respectively.
. the maximum amount allocated to the special national de-mining reserve shall be eur    and shall
be subject to the schedule of introduction of direct payments set out in article . the maximum amounts per
year shall be as follows:
l / en official journal of the european union ..
(thousand eur)
croatia          
maximum amount
for the special
national de-mining
reserve
                   
. in the first year of implementation of the single payment scheme, croatia shall allocate payment
entitlements to the farmers on the basis of the land which has been de-mined and declared by farmers in the
aid applications submitted in the first year of implementation of the single payment scheme and returned to use
for agricultural activities between  january  and  december .
. for the years  to , payment entitlements shall be allocated to farmers on the basis of the demined land declared by the farmers in the year in question on condition that such land was returned to use for
agricultural activities during the previous calendar year, and which has been notified to the commission in
accordance with paragraph .
. in order to ensure an appropriate use of union funds, the commission shall, in accordance with the
procedure referred to in article (), modify the ceiling in table  of annex viii in order to add thereto
the amounts from the special national de-mining reserve which have been allocated by  december .
. all land declared for the purpose of this article shall comply with the definition of eligible hectare provided
for in article ().
. by  july , croatia shall notify the commission of the area of land eligible according to paragraph ,
indicating both land eligible for the support levels according to article , and land eligible for the support levels
according to article . this notification shall also include information on the corresponding budgetary envelopes
and the unused amounts. from  onwards, a communication with the same information shall be sent to the
commission no later than  january every year and shall cover the previous calendar year, specifying the areas
returned to use for agricultural activities and the corresponding budgetary envelopes.
. by  december , all mined and de-mined land on which farmers might receive payment entitlement
from this special national de-mining reserve shall be identified in the integrated administration and control system
established in accordance with chapter  of title ii.’.
(n) in article , the following paragraph is added:
‘. the commission shall, in accordance with the procedure referred to in article (), adopt rules on the
initial allocation of payment entitlements in croatia.’.
(o) in article , the following paragraph is added:
‘for croatia, the dates referred to in points (a) and (b) of the first paragraph shall be  june .’.
(p) in article (), the following is added to the first subparagraph:
‘croatia may decide, by the date of accession, to use from the first year of implementation of the single payment
scheme as provided for in article () up to  % of the national ceiling referred to in article  as indicated in
table  of annex viii.’.
(q) in article (), first subparagraph, the following point is inserted after point (a):
‘(aa) specified for the year  in the case of croatia;’.
(r) article () is replaced by the following:
.. official en journal of the european union l /
‘. the following national ceilings shall apply:
member states national ceiling
bulgaria   
czech republic  
denmark  
estonia  
spain   
france   
croatia  
cyprus  
latvia  
lithuania  
hungary   
poland  
portugal   
romania   
slovenia  
slovakia  
finland  
total   ’
(s) in article (), the following is inserted after the entry for france:
‘croatia  ’
(t) article  is replaced by the following:
‘article 
introduction of direct payments
in the new member states other than bulgaria, croatia and romania, direct payments shall be introduced in
accordance with the following schedule of increments expressed as a percentage of the then applicable level of
such payments in the member states other than the new member states:
—  % in ,
—  % in ,
—  % in ,
—  % in ,
—  % as of .
in bulgaria and romania, direct payments shall be introduced in accordance with the following schedule of
increments expressed as a percentage of the then applicable level of such payments in the member states other
than the new member states:
—  % in ,
—  % in ,
l / en official journal of the european union ..
—  % in ,
—  % in ,
—  % in ,
—  % in ,
—  % in ,
—  % as of .
in croatia, direct payments shall be introduced in accordance with the following schedule of increments expressed
as a percentage of the then applicable level of such payments in the member states other than the new member
states:
—  % in ,
—  % in ,
—  % in ,
—  % in ,
—  % in ,
—  % in ,
—  % in ,
—  % in ,
—  % in ,
—  % as of .’.
(u) in article (), the following subparagraph is inserted after the second subparagraph:
‘by way of derogation from points (a) and (b) of the first subparagraph, croatia shall have the possibility to
complement direct payments up to  % of the level applicable in member states other than the new member
states.’.
(v) in annex vii, the following is inserted after the entry for france:
‘croatia  ’
(w) in annex viii, the following table is added:
‘table  (*)
member state          
croatia                    
___________
(*) ceilings calculated taking into account the schedule of increments provided for in article .’
. fisheries
.  r : council regulation (ec) no / of  december  on the conservation and sustainable
exploitation of fisheries resources under the common fisheries policy (oj l , .., p. ).
in annex i, the following parts are added:
.. official en journal of the european union l /
‘. coastal waters of croatia (*)
geographical area member state species importance or particular
characteristics
 miles limited to the sea area under
the sovereignty of croatia situated to
the north of the  degrees and 
minutes parallel north latitude along
the west istrian coast, from the outer
limit of the territorial sea of croatia,
where this parallel touches the land of
the west istrian coast (the cape
grgatov rt funtana)
slovenia demersal and small
pelagic species including
sardine and anchovy
 tonnes for a maximum
number of  fishing
vessels which includes 
fishing vessels equipped
with trawl nets
___________
(*) the above mentioned regime shall apply from the full implementation of the arbitration award resulting from the
arbitration agreement between the government of the republic of slovenia and the government of the republic
of croatia, signed in stockholm on  november .
. coastal waters of slovenia (*)
geographical area member state species importance or particular
characteristics
 miles limited to the sea area under
the sovereignty of slovenia situated to
the north of the  degrees and 
minutes parallel north latitude along
the west istrian coast, from the outer
limit of the territorial sea of croatia,
where this parallel touches the land of
the west istrian coast (the cape
grgatov rt funtana)
croatia demersal and small
pelagic species including
sardine and anchovy
 tonnes for a maximum
number of  fishing
vessels which includes 
fishing vessels equipped
with trawl nets
___________
(*) the above mentioned regime shall apply from the full implementation of the arbitration award resulting from the
arbitration agreement between the government of the republic of slovenia and the government of the republic
of croatia, signed in stockholm on  november .’
.  r : council regulation (ec) no / of  july  on the european fisheries fund (oj l ,
.., p. ).
(a) in article , the following paragraph is added:
‘. the eff may contribute to the financing of a scheme of individual premiums for fishers who will benefit
from the access regime laid down in part  of annex i to regulation (ec) no / as amended by the act
of accession of croatia. the scheme may only apply during the period  to  or, if this occurs earlier, up
until the date of the full implementation of the arbitration award resulting from the arbitration agreement
between the government of the republic of slovenia and the government of the republic of croatia, signed
in stockholm on  november .’.
(b) article () is replaced by the following:
‘. by way of derogation from paragraph , in the outermost regions and the outlying greek islands as well as
in the croatian islands dugi otok, vis, mljet and lastovo, aid may be granted to all enterprises.’.
(c) article () is replaced by the following:
‘. by way of derogation from paragraph , in the outermost regions and the outlying greek islands as well as
in the croatian islands dugi otok, vis, mljet and lastovo, aid may be granted to all enterprises.’.
(d) in article (), the first subparagraph is replaced by the following:
l / en official journal of the european union ..
‘. when operations are financed by the eff in the outlying greek islands which are under a handicap due to
their distant location and in the outermost regions as well as in the croatian islands dugi otok, vis, mljet and
lastovo, the ceiling for the contribution from the eff for each priority axis shall be increased by up to 
percentage points in the regions eligible under the convergence objective and by up to  percentage points for
the regions not eligible under the convergence objective.’.
(e) in annex ii, point (a), the table is replaced by the following:
group  group  group  group 
‘regions covered by the
convergence objective and
outlying greek islands and
the croatian islands dugi
otok, vis, mljet and lastovo
a ≤  %
b ≥  %
a ≤  %
b ≥  % (*) (**)
a ≤  %
b ≥  %
a ≤  %
b ≥  % (***)
regions not covered by the
convergence objective
a ≤  %
b ≥  %
a ≤  %
b ≥  % (*) (**)
a ≤  %
b ≥  %
a ≤  %
b ≥  % (***)
outermost regions a ≤  %
b ≥  %
a ≤  %
b ≥  % (*) (**)
a ≤  %
b ≥  %
a ≤  %
b ≥  %
(*) in the case of operations referred to in article (), the (b) rates for group  are increased by  percentage points. the (a)
rates are reduced accordingly.
(**) in the case of operations referred to in article () (investment on board within the meaning of article  in small scale
coastal fishing vessels), the (b) rates for group  may be reduced by  percentage points. the (a) rates are increased
accordingly.
(***) in case of operations referred to in articles  and  when undertaken by enterprises not covered by the definition in
article (f) with less than  employees or with a turnover of less than eur  million, the (b) rates are increased in the
regions covered by the convergence objective, with the exception of the outlying greek islands and the croatian islands dugi
otok, vis, mljet and lastovo, by  percentage points and in the regions not covered by the convergence objective by 
percentage points. the (a) rates are reduced accordingly.’
(f) in annex ii, point (a), the second paragraph of sub-title ‘group ’ is replaced by the following:
‘following the application of (*) and (**) where the eff finances operations referred to in article () in favour of
small scale coastal fishing vessels, the (b) rates for group  will be:
— for the regions covered by the convergence objective, the outlying greek islands and the croatian islands dugi
otok, vis, mljet and lastovo and the regions not covered by the convergence objective, equal to or more than
 percentage points (b ≥  %),
and
— for the outermost regions, equal to or more than  percentage points (b ≥  %).’.
. taxation
.  l : council directive //ec of  november  on the common system of value added tax (oj
l , .., p. ).
in article , the following point is added:
‘() croatia: eur  .’.
.  l : council directive //ec of  december  concerning the general arrangements for excise
duty and repealing directive //eec (oj l , .., p. ).
article () is replaced by the following:
‘. without prejudice to article , member states not referred to in the third and fourth subparagraphs of
article () of directive //eec may, as regards cigarettes which may be brought into their territory without
further payment of excise duties, apply from  january  a quantitative limit of not less than  items with
respect to cigarettes brought in from a member state which applies, in accordance with the third and fourth
subparagraphs of article () of that directive, lower excise duties than those resulting from the first
subparagraph of article () thereof.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
member states referred to in the third and fourth subparagraphs of article () of directive //eec which
levy an excise duty of at least eur  per   cigarettes irrespective of the weighted average retail selling price,
may, from  january , apply a quantitative limit of not less than  items as regards cigarettes brought
into their territory without further payment of excise duties from a member state which applies a lower excise
duty in accordance with the third subparagraph of article () of that directive.
member states which apply a quantitative limit in accordance with the first and the second subparagraphs of this
paragraph shall inform the commission thereof. they may carry out the necessary checks provided that these
checks do not affect the proper functioning of the internal market.’.
. regional policy and coordination of structural instruments
.  r : council regulation (ec) no / of  july  laying down general provisions on the
european regional development fund, the european social fund and the cohesion fund and repealing regulation
(ec) no / (oj l , .., p. ).
(a) in article (), the following sentence is added to the second subparagraph:
‘with regard to croatia, the date for this verification shall be  december .’.
(b) in article (), the first subparagraph is replaced by the following:
‘. the resources available for commitment from the funds for the period  to  shall be eur
    at  prices in accordance with the annual breakdown shown in annex i.’.
(c) article  is replaced by the following:
‘article 
resources for the convergence objective
overall resources for the convergence objective shall amount to , % of the resources referred to in
article () (i.e. a total of eur    ) and shall be distributed between the different components
as follows:
(a) , % (i.e. a total of eur    ) for the financing referred to in article (), using eligible
population, regional prosperity, national prosperity and unemployment rate as the criteria for calculating the
indicative breakdowns by member state;
(b) , % (i.e. a total of eur    ) for the transitional and specific support referred to in article (),
using eligible population, regional prosperity, national prosperity and unemployment rate as the criteria for
calculating the indicative breakdowns by member state;
(c) , % (i.e. a total of eur    ) for the financing referred to in article (), using population,
national prosperity, and surface area as the criteria for calculating the indicative breakdowns by member state;
(d) , % (i.e. a total of eur    ) for the transitional and specific support referred to in
article ().’.
(d) in article , the introductory part is replaced by the following:
‘overall resources for the regional competitiveness and employment objective shall amount to , % of the
resources referred to in article () (i.e. a total of eur    ) and shall be distributed between the
different components as follows:’.
(e) in article , paragraphs  and  are replaced by the following:
‘. overall resources for the european territorial cooperation objective shall amount to , % of the resources
referred to in article () (i.e. a total of eur    ) and, excluding the amount referred to in
paragraph  of annex ii, shall be distributed between the different components as follows:
(a) , % (i.e. a total of eur    ) for the financing of cross-border cooperation referred to in
article (), using eligible population as the criterion for calculating the indicative breakdowns by member
state;
l / en official journal of the european union ..
(b) , % (i.e. a total of eur    ) for the financing of transnational cooperation referred to in
article (), using eligible population as the criterion for calculating the indicative breakdowns by member
state;
(c) , % (i.e. a total of eur   ) for the financing of interregional cooperation, cooperation networks
and exchange of experience referred to in article ().
. the contribution from the erdf to the cross-border and sea-basin programmes under the european
neighbourhood and partnership instrument and to the cross-border programmes under the instrument for
pre-accession assistance pursuant to regulation (ec) no / shall be eur   , as a result
of the indication of each member state concerned, deducted from their allocations under paragraph (a). these
erdf contributions shall not be subject to reallocation between the member states concerned.’.
(f) in article , the following paragraph is added:
‘by way of derogation from the first paragraph, croatia may distribute its financial allocation under the european
territorial cooperation objective among the three components referred to in article ()(a) to (c) with a view to
achieving a high level of efficiency and simplification.’.
(g) article  is replaced by the following:
‘article 
resources for the performance reserve
three per cent of the resources referred to in article (a) and (b) and article  may be allocated by the
member states, with the exception of croatia, in accordance with article .’.
(h) article  is amended as follows:
(i) in paragraph , the following subparagraph is inserted after the first subparagraph:
‘with regard to croatia, the national strategic reference framework shall cover the period from the date of
accession to  december .’;
(ii) in paragraph , the following subparagraph is inserted after the first subparagraph:
‘croatia shall transmit its national strategic reference framework to the commission within three months
from the date of accession.’.
(i) in article , the following paragraph is added:
‘. paragraphs  to  shall not apply to croatia.’.
(j) in article (), the following subparagraph is added:
‘with regard to croatia, the commission shall adopt the decision approving an operational programme to be
financed under the programming period - no later than  december . croatia shall in this
operational programme take into account any observations made by the commission and submit it to the
commission no later than three months from the date of accession.’.
(k) in article (), the following subparagraph is added:
‘with regard to croatia, operational programmes adopted before the date of accession may be revised for the sole
purpose of a better alignment with this regulation.’.
(l) in article (), the following subparagraph is added:
‘with regard to croatia's operational programmes the ex post evaluation shall be completed by  december
.’.
(m) the following article is inserted:
‘article a
articles  and  shall not apply to croatia.’.
(n) article () is replaced by the following:
.. official en journal of the european union l /
‘. for operational programmes under the european territorial cooperation objective in which at least one
participant belongs to a member state whose average gdp per capita for the period  to  was below
 % of the eu- average during the same period, or for such programmes where croatia is a participating
country, the contribution from the erdf shall not be higher than  % of the eligible expenditure. for all other
operational programmes, the contribution from the erdf shall not be higher than  % of the eligible expenditure co-financed by the erdf.’.
(o) in article (), the following subparagraph is added:
‘with regard to croatia, expenditure shall be eligible for a contribution from the funds between the starting date
of eligibility of expenditure as fixed in accordance with the instruments adopted under regulation (ec) no
/ and  december . however, for operational programmes adopted after accession, expenditure
for a contribution from the funds shall be eligible from the date of accession, unless a later date is specified in
the decision on the operational programme concerned.’.
(p) in article (), the following subparagraph is added:
‘notwithstanding specific provisions on eligibility as laid down in article a, the criteria fixed by the monitoring committee of operational programmes for croatia shall not apply to operations for which the approval
decision has been adopted before the date of accession and which have been part of the instruments adopted
under regulation (ec) no /.’.
(q) article () is amended as follows:
(i) in point (c), the following subparagraph is inserted after the first subparagraph:
‘with regard to croatia, the audit authority of an operational programme shall submit to the commission an
update of the annual audit work plan as referred to in article ()(a) of commission regulation (ec) no
/ of  june  implementing council regulation (ec) no / establishing an
instrument for pre-accession assistance (ipa) (*) within three months from the date of accession.
___________
(*) oj l , .., p. .’;
(ii) in point (d)(i), the following subparagraph is added:
‘with regard to croatia, the first annual control report shall be submitted by  december  covering
the period from  october  until  june . the following reports covering the periods from  july
 to  june , from  july  to  june  and from  july  to  june  shall be
submitted to the commission by  december ,  december  and  december , respectively. the information concerning the audits carried out after  july  shall be included in the final
control report supporting the closure declaration referred to in point (e);’;
(iii) in point (e), the following subparagraph is added:
‘with regard to croatia, a closure declaration supported by the final control report, shall be submitted to the
commission by  march .’.
(r) in article (), the following subparagraph is added:
‘with regard to croatia, the managing authority shall send a final report on the implementation of the operational programme by  march .’.
(s) article  is amended as follows:
(i) the following paragraph is inserted:
‘a. notwithstanding paragraph , as soon as possible following the date of its accession or, at the latest,
before any payment by the commission is made, croatia shall submit to the commission a description of the
systems, covering the elements set out in points (a) and (b) of that paragraph.’;
(ii) the following paragraph is inserted:
‘a. paragraph  shall apply mutatis mutandis to croatia. the report referred to in the first subparagraph of
paragraph  shall be deemed to be accepted under the same conditions as those set out in the second
subparagraph of paragraph . however, such acceptance shall be a pre-requisite for the pre-financing amount
referred to in article .’.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
(t) in article , the following paragraph is inserted:
‘a. with regard to croatia, the respective budget commitments from the erdf, the cohesion fund and the
esf for  shall be made based on the decision referred to in article () before the commission takes any
decision on the revision of an adopted operational programme. the decision referred to in article () shall
constitute a financing decision within the meaning of article  of regulation (ec, euratom) no / for
any budget commitment in favour of croatia.’.
(u) in article ()(c), the following sentence is added:
‘with regard to croatia, they shall be covered by expenditure paid by beneficiaries in implementing the project
and supported by receipted invoices or accounting documents of equivalent probative value at the latest three
years after the year of the payment of the advance or on  december , whichever is the earlier; if they are
not, the next statement of expenditure shall be corrected accordingly.’.
(v) in article , the following paragraph is inserted:
‘a. with regard to croatia, following the acceptance of the report as referred to in article (a) and
following the respective budget commitments as referred to in article (a), a single pre-financing amount
for the rest of the  to  period shall be paid in a single instalment and will represent  % of the
contribution from the structural funds and  % of the contribution from the cohesion fund to the operational
programme.’.
(w) in article (), the following subparagraph is added:
‘with regard to croatia, an application for payment comprising the documents listed in point (a) (i) to (iii) shall
be sent by  march .’.
(x) in article , the following paragraph is inserted:
‘a. by way of derogation from paragraphs  to , with regard to croatia the commission shall apply the decommitment mechanism set out in paragraph  in the following way:
(i) the deadline for any open part of the  commitment shall be  december ;
(ii) the deadline for any open part of the  commitment shall be  december ;
(iii) the deadline for any open part of the  commitment shall be  december ;
(iv) any part of  commitments still open on  december  shall be automatically de-committed if the
commission has not received an acceptable application for payment for it by  march .’.
(y) in article , the following paragraph is inserted after the second paragraph:
‘by way of derogation from the first and second paragraphs, with regard to croatia the deadlines referred to in
article (a) shall be interrupted under the conditions set out in the first paragraph of this article in respect of
the amount relating to the operations concerned.’.
(z) in article (), the following subparagraph is added:
‘with regard to croatia, the resources from the funds released in this way may be reused by croatia until
 december .’.;
(za) the following article is inserted:
‘article a
specific provisions following the accession of croatia
. programmes and major projects which, on the date of accession of croatia, have been approved under
regulation (ec) no / and the implementation of which has not been completed by that date, shall be
considered to have been approved by the commission under this regulation, with the exception of programmes
approved under the components referred to in points (a) and (e) of article () of regulation (ec) no
/.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
in addition, the following programmes falling under the component referred to in point (b) of article () of
regulation (ec) no / shall also be excluded:
(a) the “ipa adriatic cross-border co-operation programme”;
(b) the “croatia — bosnia and herzegovina” cross-border programme;
(c) the “croatia — montenegro” cross-border programme;
(d) the “croatia — serbia” cross-border programme.
without prejudice to paragraphs  to , the provisions governing the implementation of operations and major
projects approved pursuant to this regulation shall apply to those operations and major projects.
. any procurement procedure relating to operations within the programmes or relating to major projects
referred to in paragraph  which, on the date of accession, has already been the subject of an invitation to tender
published in the official journal of the european union shall be implemented in accordance with the rules laid down
in that invitation to tender. article  of regulation (ec, euratom) no / shall not apply.
any procurement procedure relating to operations within the programmes or relating to major projects referred
to in paragraph  which, on the date of accession, has not yet been the subject of an invitation to tender
published in the official journal of the european union shall be implemented in compliance with the treaties or the
acts adopted under the treaties as well as with article  of this regulation.
other operations than those referred to in the first and second subparagraphs and for which calls for proposals
were launched in accordance with article  of commission regulation (ec) no / or for which
applications had been submitted to the competent authorities before the date of accession, and for which the
contracting could only be finalised after that date, shall be implemented in accordance with the conditions and
eligibility rules published in the relevant call for proposals or those communicated in advance to potential
beneficiaries.
. payments made by the commission under programmes referred to in paragraph  shall be considered as a
contribution from the funds under this regulation and shall be posted to the earliest open commitment
including ipa commitments.
any part of commitments made by the commission under programmes referred to in paragraph  still open on
the date of accession shall be governed by this regulation from the date of accession.
. for operations approved under regulation (ec) no / for which approval was given or for which
the respective grant agreements with final beneficiaries were signed before the date of accession, the rules
governing the eligibility of expenditure in accordance with, or based on, commission regulation (ec) no
/ shall remain applicable, except in duly justified cases to be decided on by the commission at
croatia's request.
the eligibility rule established in the first subparagraph applies also to major projects referred to in paragraph 
for which bilateral project agreements were signed before the date of accession.
. with regard to croatia, any reference to the funds as defined in the second paragraph of article  shall be
construed as also including the instrument for pre-accession assistance established by regulation (ec) no
/.
. specific deadlines applicable to croatia shall also apply to the following cross-border programmes falling
under the component referred to in article ()(b) of regulation (ec) no /, where croatia is a
participating country:
(a) the “hungary — croatia” cross-border programme; and
(b) the “slovenia — croatia” cross-border programme.
specific deadlines applicable to croatia under this regulation do not apply to operational programmes under the
transnational and interregional components under the european territorial cooperation objective, where croatia is
a participating country.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
. if any measures are necessary to facilitate croatia's transition from the pre-accession regime to that resulting
from the application of this article, the commission shall adopt the required measures.’.
(zb) annex i is replaced by the following:
‘annex i
annual breakdown of commitment appropriations for  to 
(referred to in article )
(eur,  prices)
      
                           ’
(zc) annex ii is amended as follows:
(i) in paragraph , the following points are added:
‘(c) for croatia, the resources for the financing of cross-border cooperation will be eur    at 
prices;
(d) for croatia, the resources for the financing of transnational cooperation will be eur    at 
prices.’;
(ii) the following paragraph is inserted:
‘a. for croatia, the maximum level of transfer from the funds will be , % of its gdp.’;
(iii) the following paragraph is inserted:
‘a. for croatia, calculations of the gdp by the commission will be based on statistics and projections
published in may .’.
(zd) annex iii is replaced by the following:
‘annex iii
ceilings applicable to co-financing rates
(referred to in article )
criteria member states
erdf and esf
percentage of eligible
expenditure
cohesion fund
percentage of
eligible expenditure
. member states whose
average gdp per capita for
the period  to 
was below  % of the eu average during the same
period
bulgaria, czech republic,
estonia, greece, croatia,
cyprus, latvia, lithuania,
hungary, malta, poland,
portugal, romania, slovenia,
slovakia
 % for the convergence
and regional competitiveness and employment
objectives
 %
. member states other than
those under () eligible for
the transitional regime of
the cohesion fund on
 january 
spain  % for the convergence
and the phasing-in regions
under the regional
competitiveness and
employment objective
 % for the regional
competitiveness and
employment objective
outside phasing-in regions
 %
.. official en journal of the european union l /
criteria member states
erdf and esf
percentage of eligible
expenditure
cohesion fund
percentage of
eligible expenditure
. member states other than
those referred to under ()
and ()
belgium, denmark,
germany, france, ireland,
italy, luxembourg, the
netherlands, austria,
finland, sweden and the
united kingdom
 % for the convergence
objective
—
. member states other than
those referred to under ()
and ()
belgium, denmark,
germany, france, ireland,
italy, luxembourg, the
netherlands, austria,
finland, sweden and the
united kingdom
 % for the regional
competitiveness and
employment objective
—
. outermost regions referred
to in article  of the
tfeu benefiting from the
additional allocation for
these regions provided for
in paragraph  of annex ii
spain, france and portugal  % —
. outermost regions referred
to in article  of the
tfeu
spain, france and portugal  % under the
convergence and regional
competitiveness and
employment objectives
—’
.  r : council regulation (ec) no / of  july  establishing a cohesion fund and repealing
regulation (ec) no / (oj l , .., p. ).
the following article is inserted:
‘article a
specific provisions following the accession of croatia
. measures which, on the date of accession of croatia, have been the subject of commission decisions on
assistance under council regulation (ec) no / of  june  establishing an instrument for
structural policies for pre-accession (*) and the implementation of which has not been completed by that date
shall be considered to have been approved by the commission under this regulation.
without prejudice to paragraphs  to , the provisions governing the implementation of actions approved
pursuant to this regulation and to regulation (ec) no / shall apply to the measures referred to in
the first subparagraph of this paragraph.
. any procurement procedure relating to measures referred to in paragraph  which, on the date of
accession, has already been the subject of an invitation to tender published in the official journal of the
european union shall be implemented in accordance with the rules laid down in that invitation to tender.
article  of council regulation (ec, euratom) no / of  june  on the financial regulation
applicable to the general budget of the european communities (**) shall not apply.
any procurement procedure relating to a measure referred to in paragraph  which, on the date of accession, has
not yet been the subject of an invitation to tender published in the official journal of the european union shall be
implemented in compliance with the treaties or the acts adopted under the treaties as well as with article  of
regulation (ec) no /.
. payments made by the commission under a measure referred to in paragraph  shall be considered as a
contribution from the fund under this regulation.
payments made by the commission under a measure referred to in paragraph  shall be posted to the earliest
open commitment made in the first instance pursuant to regulation (ec) no /, and then pursuant to
this regulation and to regulation (ec) no /.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
the conditions for interim payments or for the final balance are those set out in paragraph  (b) to (d) and
paragraphs  to  of article d in annex ii to regulation (ec) no /.
. for the measures referred to in paragraph , the rules governing the eligibility of expenditure pursuant to
regulation (ec) no / or specifically established in the relevant financing agreements shall remain
applicable, except in duly justified cases to be decided on by the commission at the request of croatia.
. if any measures are necessary to facilitate the transition of croatia from the pre-accession regime to that
resulting from the application of this article, the commission shall adopt the required measures.
___________
(*) oj l , .., p. .
(**) oj l , .., p. .’.
. environment
.  l : directive //ec of the european parliament and of the council of  october  establishing
a scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the community and amending council directive
//ec (oj l , .., p. ).
(a) in article , the following sentence is added to the first paragraph:
‘the community-wide quantity of allowances will be increased as a result of croatia's accession only by the
quantity of allowances that croatia shall auction pursuant to article ().’.
(b) in annex iia, the following is inserted after the entry for spain:
‘croatia  %’.
.  d : decision no //ec of the european parliament and of the council of  april  on the
effort of member states to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions to meet the community's greenhouse gas emission
reduction commitments up to  (oj l , .., p. ).
in annex ii, the following is inserted after the entry for france:
‘croatia  %’.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
annex iv
list referred to in article  of the act of accession: other permanent provisions
. intellectual property law
treaty on the functioning of the european union, part three, title ii, free movement of goods
specific mechanism
with regard to croatia, the holder, or the holder's beneficiary, of a patent or supplementary protection certificate (spc)
for a medicinal product filed in a member state at the time when such protection could not be obtained in croatia for
that product, may rely on the rights granted by that patent or spc in order to prevent the import and marketing of that
product in the member state or member states where the product in question enjoys patent or spc protection, even if
this product was put on the market in croatia for the first time by the holder or with the holder's consent.
any person intending to import or market a medicinal product covered by the first paragraph in a member state where
the product enjoys patent or spc protection shall demonstrate to the competent authorities in the application regarding
that import that one month's prior notification has been given to the holder or beneficiary of such protection.
. competition policy
treaty on the functioning of the european union, part three, title vii, chapter , rules on competition
. the following aid schemes and individual aid put into effect in croatia before the date of accession and still applicable
after that date shall be regarded upon accession as existing aid within the meaning of article () of the tfeu:
(a) aid measures put into effect before  march ;
(b) aid measures listed in the appendix to this annex;
(c) aid measures which prior to the date of accession were assessed by the croatian competition agency and found to
be compatible with the union acquis, and to which the commission did not raise an objection on the grounds of
serious doubts as to the compatibility of the measure with the internal market, pursuant to the procedure set out
in paragraph .
all measures still applicable after the date of accession which constitute state aid and which do not fulfil the
conditions set out above shall be considered as new aid upon accession for the purpose of the application of
article () of the tfeu.
the above provisions do not apply to aid to activities linked to the production, processing or marketing of products
listed in annex i to the teu and the tfeu.
. to the extent that croatia wishes the commission to examine an aid measure under the procedure described in point
(c) of paragraph , it shall provide the commission regularly with:
(a) a list of existing aid measures which have been assessed by the croatian competition agency and which that
authority has found to be compatible with the union acquis; and
(b) any other information which is essential for the assessment of the compatibility of the aid measure to be
examined;
in accordance with the concrete reporting format provided by the commission.
if the commission does not object to the existing aid measure on the grounds of serious doubts as to the compatibility of the measure with the internal market, within three months of receipt of complete information on that
measure or of receipt of the statement of croatia in which it informs the commission that it considers the information
provided to be complete because the additional information requested is not available or has been already provided,
the commission shall be deemed not to have raised an objection.
all aid measures submitted to the commission under the procedure described in point (c) of paragraph  prior to the
date of accession are subject to that procedure irrespective of the fact that in the period of examination croatia has
already become a member of the union.
. a commission decision to object to a measure, within the meaning of point (c) of paragraph , shall be regarded as a
decision to initiate the formal investigation procedure within the meaning of council regulation (ec) no / of
 march  laying down detailed rules for the application of article  of the ec treaty () (now article  of
the tfeu).
l / en official journal of the european union ..
(
) oj l , .., p. .
if such a decision is taken before the date of accession, the decision shall only come into effect upon the date of
accession.
. agriculture
(a) treaty on the functioning of the european union, part three, title iii, agriculture and fisheries
. public stocks held at the date of accession by croatia and resulting from its market-support policy shall be taken
over by the union at the value resulting from the application of article ()(d) and annex viii of commission
regulation (ec) no / of  june  laying down detailed rules for the application of council
regulation (ec) no / as regards the financing by the european agricultural guarantee fund (eagf)
of intervention measures in the form of public storage operations and the accounting of public storage operations
by the paying agencies of the member states (). the said stocks shall be taken over only on condition that public
intervention for the products in question is operated in the union and that the stocks meet the union intervention
requirements.
. for any stocks, whether private or public, in free circulation at the date of accession in croatia and which exceed
the level of what can be considered as normal carry-over of stock, croatia shall be charged with a payment to the
general budget of the european union.
the amount of the payment shall be fixed at a level which reflects the cost related to the effects of the surplus
stock on the markets of agricultural products.
the level of the surplus stock shall be determined for each product taking into account the characteristics of each
product and the relevant markets as well as union legislation applicable to it.
. the stocks referred to in paragraph  shall be deducted from the quantity exceeding the normal carry-over of
stocks.
. the commission shall implement and apply the arrangements outlined in paragraphs  to  in accordance with the
procedure laid down in article () of council regulation (ec) no / of  june  on the financing
of the common agricultural policy () or, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure referred to in
article () of council regulation (ec) no / or the relevant committee procedure as determined in
the applicable legislation.
(b) treaty on the functioning of the european union, part three, title vii, chapter , rules on competition
without prejudice to the procedures concerning existing aid provided for in article  of the tfeu, aid schemes and
individual aid granted to activities linked to the production of, and trade in, products listed in annex i to the teu and
the tfeu, with the exception of fisheries products and products derived therefrom, put into effect in croatia before the
date of accession and still applicable after that date, shall be regarded as existing aid within the meaning of
article () of the tfeu subject to the following conditions:
— the aid measures shall be communicated to the commission within a period of four months from the date of
accession. this communication shall include information on the legal basis for each measure. existing aid measures
and plans to grant or alter aid communicated to the commission prior to the date of accession shall be deemed to
have been communicated on the date of accession. the commission shall publish a list of such aid.
those aid measures shall be regarded as ‘existing’ aid within the meaning of article () of the tfeu for a period of
three years from the date of accession.
within a period of three years from the date of accession croatia shall, where necessary, amend those aid measures in
order to comply with the guidelines applied by the commission. after that period, any aid found to be incompatible
with those guidelines shall be considered as new aid.
. fisheries
treaty on the functioning of the european union, part three, title vii, chapter , rules on competition
without prejudice to the procedures concerning existing aid provided for in article  of the tfeu, aid schemes and
individual aid granted to activities linked to the production of, and trade in, fisheries products and products derived
therefrom listed in annex i to the teu and the tfeu, put into effect in croatia before the date of accession and still
applicable after that date, shall be regarded as existing aid within the meaning of article () of the tfeu subject to the
following conditions:
— the aid measures shall be communicated to the commission within a period of four months from the date of
accession. this communication shall include information on the legal basis for each measure. existing aid
measures and plans to grant or alter aid communicated to the commission prior to the date of accession shall be
deemed to have been communicated on the date of accession. the commission shall publish a list of such aid.
those aid measures shall be regarded as ‘existing’ aid within the meaning of article () of the tfeu for a period of
three years from the date of accession.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
(
) oj l , .., p.  and oj l m, .., p. .
(
) oj l , .., p. .
within a period of three years from the date of accession croatia shall, where necessary, amend those aid measures in
order to comply with the guidelines applied by the commission. after that period, any aid found to be incompatible
with those guidelines shall be considered as new aid.
. customs union
treaty on the functioning of the european union, part three, title ii, free movement of goods, chapter , the customs
union
 r : council regulation (eec) no / of  october  establishing the community customs code
(oj l , .., p. ).
 r : commission regulation (eec) no / of  july  laying down provisions for the implementation of council regulation (eec) no / establishing the community customs code (oj l , .., p. ).
council regulation (eec) no / and commission regulation (eec) no / shall apply to croatia subject to
the following specific provisions.
proof of union status (trade within the enlarged union)
. notwithstanding article  of council regulation (eec) no /, goods which on the date of accession are in
temporary storage or under one of the customs treatments and procedures referred to in article ()(b) and ()(b)
to (h) of that regulation in the enlarged union, or which are in transport after having been the subject of export
formalities within the enlarged union, shall be free of customs duties and other customs measures when declared for
release for free circulation within the enlarged union on condition that one of the following is presented:
(a) proof of preferential origin properly issued or made out prior to the date of accession under the saa;
(b) any of the means of proof of union status referred to in article c of commission regulation (eec) no
/;
(c) an ata carnet issued before the date of accession in a present member state or in croatia.
. for the purpose of issuing the proof referred to in paragraph (b), with reference to the situation at the date of
accession and in addition to the provisions of article () of council regulation (eec) no /, ‘community
goods’ shall mean goods:
— wholly obtained in the territory of croatia under conditions identical to those of article  of council regulation
(eec) no / and not incorporating goods imported from other countries or territories,
— imported from countries or territories other than croatia, and released for free circulation in croatia, or
— obtained or produced in croatia, either from goods referred to in the second indent alone or from goods referred
to in the first and second indent.
. for the purpose of verifying the proof referred to in paragraph (a), the provisions concerning the definition of
‘originating products’ and the methods of administrative cooperation under the saa shall apply. requests for
subsequent verification of such proof shall be accepted by the competent customs authorities of the present
member states and of croatia for a period of three years from the issue or making out of the proof of origin
concerned and may be made by those authorities for a period of three years after acceptance of the proof of origin in
support of a declaration of free circulation.
proof of preferential origin (trade with third countries, including turkey, in the framework
of the preferential agreements on agriculture, coal and steel products)
. without prejudice to the application of any measure deriving from the common commercial policy, proof of origin
properly issued by third countries or made out in the framework of preferential agreements concluded by croatia
with those third countries shall be accepted in croatia, provided that:
(a) the acquisition of such origin confers preferential tariff treatment on the basis of the preferential tariff measures
contained in agreements or arrangements which the union has concluded with, or adopted in respect of, those
third countries or groups of third countries, as referred to in article ()(d) and (e) of council regulation (eec)
no /;
(b) the proof of origin and the transport documents were issued or made out no later than the day before the date of
accession; and
(c) the proof of origin is submitted to the customs authorities within a period of four months from the date of
accession.
where goods were declared for release for free circulation in croatia prior to the date of accession, proof of origin
issued or made out retrospectively under preferential agreements in force in croatia at the date of the release for free
circulation may also be accepted in croatia, provided that such proof of origin is submitted to the customs authorities within a period of four months from the date of accession.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
. croatia is authorised to retain the authorisations with which the status of ‘approved exporters’ has been granted in
the framework of agreements concluded with third countries, provided that:
(a) such a provision is also provided for in the agreements or arrangements which the union has concluded with, or
adopted in respect of, those third countries or groups of third countries prior to the date of accession; and
(b) the approved exporters apply the rules of origin provided for in those agreements or arrangements.
these authorisations shall be replaced by croatia, no later than one year from the date of accession, by new
authorisations issued under the conditions of union legislation.
. for the purpose of verifying the proof referred to in paragraph , the provisions concerning the definition of
‘originating products’ and the methods of administrative cooperation of the relevant agreements or arrangements
shall apply. requests for subsequent verification of such proof shall be accepted by the competent customs authorities of the present member states and of croatia for a period of three years after the issue or making out of the
proof of origin concerned and may be made by those authorities for a period of three years after acceptance of the
proof of origin in support of a declaration of free circulation.
. without prejudice to the application of any measure deriving from the common commercial policy, proof of origin
issued or made out retrospectively by third countries in the framework of preferential agreements or arrangements
which the union has concluded with, or adopted in respect of, these third countries shall be accepted in croatia for
the release for free circulation of goods which on the date of accession are either in transport or in temporary
storage, in a customs warehouse or in a free zone in one of these third countries or in croatia, provided that croatia
had no free trade agreement in force with the third country, for the products concerned, at the moment when the
transport documents were issued, and provided that:
(a) the acquisition of such origin confers preferential tariff treatment on the basis of the preferential tariff measures
contained in agreements or arrangements which the union has concluded with, or adopted in respect of, third
countries or groups of third countries, as referred to in article ()(d) and (e) of council regulation (eec) no
/;
(b) the transport documents were issued no later than the day before the date of accession; and
(c) the proof of origin issued or made out retrospectively is submitted to the customs authorities within a period of
four months from the date of accession.
. for the purpose of verifying the proofs referred to in paragraph , the provisions concerning the definition of
‘originating products’ and the methods of administrative cooperation of the relevant agreements or arrangements
shall apply.
proof of status under the provisions on free circulation for industrial products within the
eu-turkey customs union
. proof of origin properly issued by either turkey or croatia or made out in the framework of preferential trade
agreements applied between them and providing for a prohibition of drawback of, or exemption from, customs
duties on the goods concerned shall be accepted in the respective countries as proof of status under the provisions
on free circulation for industrial products, laid down in decision no / of the ec-turkey association council of
 december  on implementing the final phase of the customs union () (hereinafter referred to as ‘decision
no /’), provided that:
(a) the proof of origin and the transport documents were issued or made out no later than the day before the date of
accession; and
(b) the proof of origin is submitted to the customs authorities within a period of four months from the date of
accession.
where goods were declared for release for free circulation in either turkey or croatia, prior to the date of accession,
in the framework of preferential trade agreements referred to in the first subparagraph, proof of origin issued or
made out retrospectively under those agreements may also be accepted provided that it is submitted to the customs
authorities within a period of four months from the date of accession.
. for the purpose of verifying the proof referred to in paragraph , the provisions concerning the definition of
‘originating products’ and the methods of administrative cooperation of the relevant preferential agreements shall
apply. requests for subsequent verification of such proof shall be accepted by the competent customs authorities of
the present member states and of croatia for a period of three years after the issue or making out of the proof of
origin concerned and may be made by those authorities for a period of three years after acceptance of the proof of
origin in support of a declaration of free circulation.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
(
) oj l , .., p. .
. without prejudice to the application of any measure deriving from the common commercial policy, an a.tr
movement certificate issued under the provisions on free circulation for industrial products, laid down in
decision no /, shall be accepted in croatia for the release for free circulation of goods which on the date of
accession are either in transport after having been the subject of export formalities within the union or turkey or are
in temporary storage or under a customs procedure referred to in article ()(b) to (h) of council regulation (eec)
no / in turkey or in croatia, provided that:
(a) no proof of origin as referred to in paragraph  is submitted for the goods concerned;
(b) the goods comply with the conditions for the implementation of the provisions on free circulation for industrial
products;
(c) the transport documents were issued no later than the day before the date of accession; and
(d) the a.tr movement certificate is submitted to the customs authorities within four months from the date of
accession.
. for the purpose of verifying the a.tr movement certificates referred to in paragraph , the provisions concerning
the issue of a.tr movement certificates and the methods of administrative cooperation under decision no /
of the ec-turkey customs cooperation committee of  july  laying down detailed rules for the application of
decision no / of the ec-turkey association council () shall apply.
customs procedures
. temporary storage and customs procedures referred to in article ()(b) to (h) of council regulation (eec) no
/ which have begun before accession shall be ended or discharged under the conditions of union legislation.
where the end or discharge gives rise to a customs debt, the amount of import duty to be paid shall be that in force
at the time when the customs debt is incurred in accordance with the common customs tariff and the amount paid
shall be considered as own resources of the union.
. the procedures governing customs warehousing laid down in articles  to  and  to  of council regulation
(eec) no / and articles  to  of commission regulation (eec) no / shall apply to croatia
subject to the following specific provisions:
— where the amount of a customs debt is determined on the basis of the nature of the import goods and where the
declaration placing the goods under the procedure was accepted prior to the date of accession, the tariff
classification, quantity, value for customs purposes and origin of the import goods at the time they were
placed under the procedure shall result from the legislation applicable in croatia at the date of acceptance of
the declaration by the customs authorities.
. the procedures governing inward processing laid down in articles  to  and  to  of council regulation
(eec) no / and articles  to  and  to  of commission regulation (eec) no / shall
apply to croatia subject to the following specific provisions:
— where the amount of a customs debt is determined on the basis of the nature of the import goods and where the
declaration placing the goods under the procedure was accepted prior to the date of accession, the tariff
classification, quantity, value for customs purposes and origin of the import goods at the time they were
placed under the procedure shall result from the legislation applicable in croatia at the date of acceptance of
the declaration by the customs authorities,
— where the discharge gives rise to a customs debt, in order to maintain equity between the holders of authorisations established in the present member states and those in croatia, compensatory interest shall be paid on
the import duties due under the conditions of union legislation from the date of accession,
— if the declaration for inward processing was accepted under a drawback system, the drawback shall be effected
under the conditions of union legislation, by and at the expense of croatia, where the customs debt in respect of
which the drawback is requested was incurred before the date of accession.
. the procedures governing temporary importation laid down in articles  to  and  to  of council
regulation (eec) no / and articles  to  and  to  of commission regulation (eec) no
/ shall apply to croatia subject to the following specific provisions:
— where the amount of a customs debt is determined on the basis of the nature of the import goods and where the
declaration placing the goods under the procedure was accepted prior to the date of accession, the tariff
classification, quantity, value for customs purposes and origin of the import goods at the time they were
placed under the procedure shall result from the legislation applicable in croatia at the date of acceptance of
the declaration by the customs authorities,
l / en official journal of the european union ..
(
) oj l , .., p. .
— where the discharge gives rise to a customs debt, in order to maintain equity between the holders of authorisations established in the present member states and those in croatia, compensatory interest shall be paid on
the import duties due under the conditions of union legislation from the date of accession.
. the procedures governing outward processing laid down in articles  to  and  to  of council regulation
(eec) no / and articles  to  and  to  of commission regulation (eec) no / shall
apply to croatia subject to the following specific provisions:
— article , second paragraph, of commission regulation (eec) no / shall apply mutatis mutandis to
temporary export goods which have been exported temporarily from croatia before the date of accession.
other provisions
. authorisations which have been granted by croatia before the date of accession for the use of the customs
procedures referred to in article ()(d), (e) and (g) or the status of authorised economic operators referred to
in article a() of council regulation (eec) no / shall be valid until the end of their validity or one year
from the date of accession, whichever is the earlier.
. the procedures governing incurrence of a customs debt, entry in the accounts and post-clearance recovery laid down
in articles  to  of council regulation (eec) no / and articles  to a of commission
regulation (eec) no / shall apply to croatia subject to the following specific provisions:
— recovery shall be effected under the conditions of union legislation. however, where the customs debt was
incurred before the date of accession, recovery shall be effected by croatia, in its own favour, under the
conditions in force in croatia before accession.
. the procedures governing repayment and remission of duty laid down in articles  to  of council regulation
(eec) no / and articles  to  of commission regulation (eec) no / shall apply to croatia
subject to the following specific provisions:
— repayment and remission of duties shall be effected under the conditions of union legislation. however, where
the duties of which repayment or remission is requested relate to a customs debt which was incurred before the
date of accession, the repayment and remission of duties shall be effected by croatia, at its own expense, under
the conditions in force in croatia before accession.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
appendix to annex iv
list of existing aid measures referred to in point (b) of paragraph  of the existing aid mechanism provided for
in section  (‘competition policy’)
note: the aid measures listed in this appendix are only to be considered as existing aid for the purpose of the
application of the existing aid mechanism set out in section  to the extent that they fall within the scope of
paragraph  thereof.
registration number
title (original)
date of approval
by the croatian
competition
agency
duration
ms no. yr
hr   zakon o slobodnim zonama (nn /, /,
/)
.. ..
hr   zakon o hrvatskoj radioteleviziji (nn /) .. unlimited
hr   odluka o otvorenosti zračne luke osijek d.o.o. u
razdoblju od . do . godine, od . veljače
. i . travnja .
.. ..
hr   program financiranja nakladništva od . do . .. ..
hr   naknadno odobrenje državnih potpora poduzetniku
rockwool adriatic d.o.o.
.. ..
hr   zakon o znanstvenoj djelatnosti i visokom
obrazovanju
(nn /, /, /, /, /)
.. ..
hr   odluka o obvezi otvorenosti zračne luke rijeka d.o.o.
za javni zračni promet u razdoblju od . do
., od . siječnja . i . studenoga .
.. ..
l / en official journal of the european union ..
annex v
list referred to in article  of the act of accession: transitional measures
. free movement of goods
 l : directive //ec of the european parliament and of the council of  november  on the
community code relating to medicinal products for human use (oj l , .., p. ).
by way of derogation from the requirements of quality, safety and efficacy laid down in directive //ec, marketing
authorisations for medicinal products, which are not subject to article () of regulation (ec) no / of the
european parliament and of the council of  march  laying down community procedures for the authorisation
and supervision of medicinal products for human and veterinary use and establishing a european medicines agency ()
and which are on the list (in the appendix to this annex as provided by croatia) issued under croatian law prior to the
date of accession shall remain valid until they are renewed in compliance with the union acquis or until four years from
the date of accession, whichever is earlier.
the marketing authorisations covered by this derogation shall not benefit from mutual recognition in the member states
as long as these products have not been authorised according to directive //ec.
the national marketing authorisations granted under national law before accession and not covered by this derogation
and every new marketing authorisation shall, as of the date of accession, be in compliance with directive //ec.
. free movement of persons
treaty on the functioning of the european union
 l : directive //ec of the european parliament and of the council of  december  concerning the
posting of workers in the framework of the provision of services (oj l , .., p. ).
 l : directive //ec of the european parliament and of the council of  april  on the right of
citizens of the union and their family members to move and reside freely within the territory of the member states
amending regulation (eec) no / and repealing directives //eec, //eec, //eec, //eec,
//eec, //eec, //eec, //eec and //eec (oj l , .., p. ).
 r : regulation (eu) no / of the european parliament and of the council of  april  on
freedom of movement for workers within the union (oj l , .., p. ).
. article  and the first paragraph of article  of the tfeu shall fully apply only, in relation to the freedom of
movement of workers and the freedom to provide services involving temporary movement of workers as defined in
article  of directive //ec, between croatia on the one hand and each of the present member states on the
other hand, subject to the transitional provisions laid down in paragraphs  to .
. by way of derogation from articles  to  of regulation (eu) no / and until the end of the two year period
following the date of accession, the present member states will apply national measures, or those resulting from
bilateral agreements, regulating access to their labour markets by croatian nationals. the present member states may
continue to apply such measures until the end of the five year period following the date of accession.
croatian nationals legally working in a present member state at the date of accession and admitted to the labour
market of that member state for an uninterrupted period of  months or longer will enjoy access to the labour
market of that member state but not to the labour market of other member states applying national measures.
croatian nationals admitted to the labour market of a present member state following accession for an uninterrupted
period of  months or longer shall also enjoy the same rights.
the croatian nationals referred to in the second and third subparagraphs shall cease to enjoy the rights referred to in
those subparagraphs if they voluntarily leave the labour market of the present member state in question.
croatian nationals legally working in a present member state at the date of accession, or during a period when
national measures are applied, and who were admitted to the labour market of that member state for a period of less
than  months shall not enjoy the rights referred to in the second and third subparagraphs.
. before the end of the two year period following the date of accession, the council shall review the functioning of the
transitional provisions laid down in paragraph , on the basis of a report from the commission.
on completion of this review, and no later than at the end of the two year period following the date of accession,
the present member states shall notify the commission whether they will continue to apply national measures or
measures resulting from bilateral agreements, or whether they will apply articles  to  of regulation (eu) no
/ thereafter. in the absence of such notification, articles  to  of regulation (eu) no / shall apply.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
(
) oj l , .., p. .
. upon croatia’s request, one further review may be held. the procedure referred to in paragraph  shall apply and
shall be completed within six months of receipt of croatia’s request.
. a member state maintaining national measures or measures resulting from bilateral agreements at the end of the five
year period referred to in paragraph  may, in case of serious disturbances of its labour market or threat thereof and
after notifying the commission, continue to apply these measures until the end of the seven year period following
the date of accession. in the absence of such notification, articles  to  of regulation (eu) no / shall
apply.
. during the seven year period following the date of accession, those member states in which, by virtue of paragraphs
,  or , articles  to  of regulation (eu) no / apply as regards croatian nationals, and which issue work
permits to nationals of croatia for monitoring purposes during this period, will do so automatically.
. those member states in which, by virtue of paragraphs ,  or , articles  to  of regulation (eu) no /
apply as regards croatian nationals, may resort to the procedures set out in the second and third subparagraphs of
this paragraph until the end of the seven year period following the date of accession.
when a member state referred to in the first subparagraph undergoes or foresees disturbances on its labour market
which could seriously threaten the standard of living or level of employment in a given region or occupation, that
member state shall inform the commission and the other member states thereof and shall supply them with all
relevant particulars. on the basis of this information, the member state may request the commission to state that the
application of articles  to  of regulation (eu) no / is wholly or partially suspended in order to restore to
normal the situation in that region or occupation. the commission shall decide on the suspension and on the
duration and scope thereof no later than two weeks after receiving such a request and shall notify the council of its
decision. any member state may, within two weeks of the commission's decision, request the council to annul or
amend that decision. the council shall act on such a request within two weeks, by qualified majority.
a member state referred to in the first subparagraph may, in urgent and exceptional cases, suspend the application of
articles  to  of regulation (eu) no /, followed by a reasoned ex post notification to the commission.
. as long as the application of articles  to  of regulation (eu) no / is suspended by virtue of paragraphs 
to  and  above, article  of directive //ec shall apply in croatia with regard to nationals of the present
member states, and in the present member states with regard to croatian nationals, under the following conditions,
so far as the right of family members of workers to take up employment is concerned:
— the spouse of a worker and their descendants who are under  years of age or are dependants, legally residing
with the worker in the territory of a member state at the date of accession, shall have, upon accession, immediate
access to the labour market of that member state. this does not apply to family members of a worker legally
admitted to the labour market of that member state for a period of less than  months,
— the spouse of a worker and their descendants who are under  years of age or are dependants, legally residing
with the worker in the territory of a member state from a date later than the date of accession, but during the
period of application of the transitional provisions laid down above, shall have access to the labour market of the
member state concerned once they have been resident in the member state concerned for at least  months or
from the third year following the date of accession, whichever is earlier.
these provisions shall be without prejudice to more favourable measures, whether national measures or measures
resulting from bilateral agreements.
. insofar as the provisions of directive //ec which take over the provisions of council directive //eec of
 october  on the abolition of restrictions on movement and residence within the community for workers of
member states and their families () may not be dissociated from those of regulation (eu) no / whose
application is deferred pursuant to paragraphs  to  and  and , croatia and the present member states may
derogate from those provisions to the extent necessary for the application of paragraphs  to  and  and .
. whenever national measures, or those resulting from bilateral agreements, are applied by the present member states
by virtue of the transitional provisions laid down above, croatia may maintain in force equivalent measures with
regard to the nationals of the member state or member states in question.
. any present member state applying national measures in accordance with paragraphs  to  and  to , may
introduce, under national law, greater freedom of movement than that existing at the date of accession, including full
labour market access. from the third year following the date of accession, any present member state applying
national measures may at any time decide to apply articles  to  of regulation (eu) no / instead. the
commission shall be informed of any such decision.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
(
) oj l , .., p. . directive as last amended by the  act of accession (oj l , .., p. ) and repealed with
effect from  april  by european parliament and council directive //ec (oj l , .., p. ).
. in order to address serious disturbances or the threat thereof in specific sensitive service sectors in the labour markets
of germany and austria, which could arise in certain regions from the transnational provision of services, as defined
in article  of directive //ec, and as long as they apply by virtue of the transitional provisions laid down above,
national measures or those resulting from bilateral agreements on the free movement of croatian workers, germany
and austria may, after notifying the commission, derogate from the first paragraph of article  of the tfeu with a
view to limiting in the context of the provision of services by companies established in croatia, the temporary
movement of workers whose right to take up work in germany and austria is subject to national measures.
the list of service sectors which may be covered by this derogation is as follows:
— in germany:
sector nace (*) code, unless otherwise specified
construction, including related branches . to ;
activities listed in the annex to directive
//ec
industrial cleaning . industrial cleaning
other services . only activities of interior decorators
(*) nace: see  r : council regulation (eec) no / of  october  on the statistical
classification of economic activities in the european community (oj l , .., p. );
— in austria:
sector nace (*) code, unless otherwise specified
horticultural service activities .
cutting, shaping and finishing of stone .
manufacture of metal structures and parts of structures .
construction, including related branches . to ;
activities listed in the annex to directive
//ec
security activities .
industrial cleaning .
home nursing .
social work and activities without accommodation .
(*) nace: see  r : council regulation (eec) no / of  october  on the statistical
classification of economic activities in the european community (oj l , .., p. ).
to the extent that germany or austria derogate from the first paragraph of article  of the tfeu in accordance
with the first and second subparagraphs of this paragraph, croatia may, after notifying the commission, take
equivalent measures.
the effect of the application of the present paragraph shall not result in conditions for the temporary movement of
workers in the context of the transnational provision of services between germany or austria and croatia which are
more restrictive than those prevailing on the date of signature of the treaty of accession.
. the effect of the application of paragraphs  to  and  to  shall not result in conditions for access of croatian
nationals to the labour markets of the present member states which are more restrictive than those prevailing on the
date of signature of the treaty of accession.
notwithstanding the application of the provisions laid down in paragraphs  to , the present member states shall,
during any period when national measures or those resulting from bilateral agreements are applied, give preference to
workers who are nationals of the member states over workers who are nationals of third countries as regards access
to their labour market.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
croatian migrant workers and their families legally resident and working in another member state or migrant
workers from other member states and their families legally resident and working in croatia shall not be treated
in a more restrictive way than those from third countries resident and working in that member state or croatia
respectively. furthermore, in application of the principle of union preference, migrant workers from third countries
resident and working in croatia shall not be treated more favourably than nationals of croatia.
. free movement of capital
treaty on european union and the treaty on the functioning of the european union.
notwithstanding the obligations under the treaties on which the european union is founded, croatia may maintain in
force for seven years from the date of accession the restrictions laid down in its agricultural land act (og /), as in
force on the date of signature of the treaty of accession, on the acquisition of agricultural land by nationals of another
member state, by nationals of the states which are a party to the european economic area agreement (eeaa) and by
legal persons formed in accordance with the laws of another member state or an eeaa state. however, a national of a
member state or a legal person formed in accordance with the laws of another member state, may in no instance be
treated less favourably in respect of the acquisition of agricultural land than such a national or person would have been
treated at the date of signature of the treaty of accession or be treated in a more restrictive way than a national or a legal
person of a third country.
self-employed farmers, who are nationals of another member state and who wish to establish themselves and reside in
croatia, shall not be subject to the provisions of the first paragraph or to any rules and procedures other than those to
which nationals of croatia are subject.
a general review of this transitional measure shall be held by the end of the third year following the date of accession. to
this effect, the commission shall submit a report to the council. the council may, acting unanimously on a proposal
from the commission, decide to shorten or terminate the transitional period indicated in the first paragraph.
if there is sufficient evidence that, upon expiry of the transitional period, there will be serious disturbances or a threat of
serious disturbances on croatia's agricultural land market, the commission, at croatia's request, shall decide upon the
extension of the transitional period for three years. this extension may be limited to selected geographical areas
particularly affected.
. agriculture
i. transitional measures for croatia
.  l : council directive //ec of  december  relating to fruit jams, jellies and marmalades
and sweetened chestnut purée intended for human consumption (oj l , .., p. ).
by way of derogation from the obligation laid down in article , the marketing of products designated under the
names ‘domaća marmelada’ and ‘ekstra domaća marmelada’ shall be permitted on the croatian market until clearance
of the stocks existing at the date of accession.
.  r : council regulation (ec) no / of  march  on the protection of geographical indications and designations of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs (oj l , .., p.  and oj l m,
.., p. ).
(a) in article (), the second subparagraph is replaced by the following:
‘bulgaria, romania and croatia shall introduce the said laws, regulations or administrative provisions no later than
one year after their respective date of accession.’.
(b) in article (), the first subparagraph is replaced by the following:
‘. in the case of bulgaria, romania and croatia, the national protection of geographical indications and
designations of origin existing at the date of their accession may continue for twelve months from their respective
date of accession.’.
.  r : council regulation (ec) no / of  october  establishing a common organisation of
agricultural markets and on specific provisions for certain agricultural products (single cmo regulation) (oj l ,
.., p. ).
(a) in article m, the following paragraph is added:
‘. by way of derogation from paragraphs  to , croatia shall be allowed to place on the market in croatia or
export to third countries, wines with the denomination “mlado vino portugizac”, until clearance of the stocks
existing at the date of accession. croatia shall set up a computerised databank with information on the stocks
existing at the date of accession, and shall ensure that these stocks are verified and declared to the commission.’.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
(b) in article s, the following paragraph is added:
‘. for croatia, the wine names published in oj c  of  april  shall be protected under this
regulation, subject to a favourable outcome of the objection procedure. the commission shall list them in the
register provided for in article n.
paragraphs  to  of this article shall apply, subject to the following: the deadline referred to in paragraph  shall
be one year from the date of accession of croatia. the deadline referred to in paragraph  shall be four years from
the date of accession of croatia.’.
.  r : council regulation (ec) no / of  january  establishing common rules for direct
support schemes for farmers under the common agricultural policy and establishing certain support schemes for
farmers, amending regulations (ec) no /, (ec) no /, (ec) no / and repealing regulation
(ec) no / (oj l , .., p. ).
(a) by way of derogation from the obligation laid down in article () of regulation (ec) no / to respect the
statutory management requirements listed in annex ii of that regulation, farmers in croatia receiving direct
payments shall include into the scope of cross compliance the statutory management requirements laid down
in points a, b and c of annex ii in accordance with the following timetable: as of  january  for point a, as
of  january  for point b and as of  january  for point c.
(b) the following chapter heading and article are inserted after chapter  in title v of regulation (ec) no /:
‘chapter a
single payment scheme
article a
single payment scheme in croatia
for croatia, the application of articles , , ,  and  shall be optional until  december  insofar as
those provisions relate to statutory management requirements. as of  january , a farmer receiving payments
under the single payment scheme in croatia shall fulfil the statutory management requirements referred to in
annex ii in accordance with the following timetable:
(a) requirements referred to in point a of annex ii shall apply from  january ;
(b) requirements referred to in point b of annex ii shall apply from  january ;
(c) requirements referred to in point c of annex ii shall apply from  january .’.
ii. transitional tariff quota for raw cane sugar for refining
an annual autonomous erga omnes import quota of   tonnes of raw cane sugar for refining shall be reserved for
croatia for a period of up to three marketing years following its accession at an import duty of eur , per tonne.
should negotiations with other members of the world trade organisation according to article xxiv. of the general
agreement on tariffs and trade on compensatory adjustment following the accession of croatia result in the opening of
compensatory sugar quotas before the end of the transitional period, the quota of   tonnes allocated to croatia
shall be terminated, wholly or partially, upon the opening of the compensatory sugar quotas. the commission shall adopt
necessary implementing measures in accordance with the procedure referred to in article () of council regulation
(ec) no / in conjunction with article ()(b) of european parliament and council regulation (eu) no
/.
iii. temporary direct payments measures for croatia
the reimbursement of direct payments granted to farmers for the year  shall be conditional on the application by
croatia, before accession, of rules identical to those set out for such direct payments in council regulation (ec) /
and in commission regulation (ec) no / of  october  laying down detailed rules for the implementation of the single payment scheme provided for in title iii of council regulation (ec) no / establishing
common rules for direct support schemes for farmers under the common agricultural policy and establishing certain
support schemes for farmers (), commission regulation (ec) no / of  october  laying down detailed
rules for the application of council regulation (ec) no / as regards the support schemes for farmers provided for
in titles iv and v thereof () and commission regulation (ec) no / of  november  laying down
detailed rules for the implementation of council regulation (ec) no / as regards cross-compliance, modulation
and the integrated administration and control system, under the direct support schemes for farmers provided for that
regulation, as well as for the implementation of council regulation (ec) no / as regards cross-compliance
under the support scheme provided for the wine sector ().
.. official en journal of the european union l /
(
) oj l , .., p. .
(
) oj l , .., p. .
(
) oj l , .., p. .
. food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy
i. laying hens
 l : council directive //ec of  july  laying down minimum standards for the protection of
laying hens (oj l , .., p. ).
by way of derogation from article  of council directive //ec, with regard to croatia, laying hens in lay at the
date of accession may be kept in cages which are not in conformity with the structural requirements laid down in that
article. croatia shall ensure that the use of such cages stops at the latest  months after accession.
eggs from those un-enriched cages shall only be placed on the national market of croatia. such eggs and their packs shall
be clearly identified with a special mark, which allows for the necessary controls. a clear description of this special mark
shall be communicated to the commission no later than one year before the date of accession.
ii. establishments (meat, milk, fish and animal by-products)
 r : regulation (ec) no / of the european parliament and of the council of  april  on the
hygiene of foodstuffs (oj l , .., p. ).
 r : regulation (ec) no / of the european parliament and of the council of  april  laying
down specific hygiene rules for food of animal origin (oj l , .., p. ).
 r : regulation (ec) no / of the european parliament and of the council of  october 
laying down health rules as regards animal by-products and derived products not intended for human consumption and
repealing regulation (ec) no / (animal by-products regulation) (oj l , .., p. ).
. the structural requirements laid down in:
(a) european parliament and council regulation (ec) no /:
— annex ii, chapter ii;
(b) european parliament and council regulation (ec) no /:
— annex iii, section i, chapters ii and iii,
— annex iii, section ii, chapters ii and iii,
— annex iii, section v, chapter i;
(c) commission regulation (eu) no / of  february  implementing regulation (ec) no / of
the european parliament and of the council laying down health rules as regards animal by-products and derived
products not intended for human consumption and implementing council directive //ec as regards certain
samples and items exempt from veterinary checks at the border under that directive ():
— annex iv, chapter i,
— annex ix, chapters i, ii and iii,
— annex x, chapters i and ii, and
— annex xiii;
shall not apply to certain establishments in the meat, milk, fish and animal by-products sectors in croatia until
 december , subject to the conditions laid down below.
. as long as the establishments referred to in paragraph  benefit from that paragraph, products originating from those
establishments shall only be placed on the national market of croatia or on markets of third countries in accordance
with relevant union legislation, or used for further processing in establishments in croatia also covered by paragraph
, irrespective of the date of marketing.
. food from establishments referred to in paragraph  shall bear a different health or identification mark to that
provided for in article  of regulation (ec) no /. a clear description of the different health or identification
mark shall be communicated to the commission no later than one year before the date of accession.
. paragraphs  and  also apply to all products originating from integrated meat, milk or fishery establishments where a
part of the establishment is subject to paragraph .
. croatia shall continuously monitor the implementation of the national programme for upgrading establishments and
shall provide the commission with an annual plan of progress in this respect. croatia shall ensure that an individual
upgrading plan for each of these establishments with deadlines for the correction of the structural requirements is
elaborated and made available to the commission on request.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
(
) oj l , .., p. .
. in good time before accession the commission shall establish a list of the establishments referred to in paragraph .
that list shall be made public and shall include the name and address of each establishment.
. croatia shall ensure that any establishments which by the time of accession fail fully to comply with the food safety
acquis of the union, except where covered by the provisions of this transitional measure, terminate their activities.
. implementing rules to ensure the smooth operation of the transitional regime with respect to regulations (ec) no
/ and no /, may be adopted in accordance with the second paragraph of article  and the second
paragraph of article  respectively thereof.
. implementing rules to ensure the smooth operation of the transitional regime with respect to regulation (ec) no
/ may be adopted in accordance with article () thereof.
iii. marketing of seeds
 l : council directive //ec of  june  on the common catalogue of varieties of agricultural
plant species (oj l , .., p. ).
 l : council directive //ec of  june  on the marketing of vegetable seed (oj l ,
.., p. ).
croatia may postpone until  december  the application of article () of directive //ec and article ()
of directive //ec with regard to the marketing in its territory of seeds of varieties listed in its respective national
catalogues of varieties of agricultural plant species and varieties of vegetable plant species which have not been officially
accepted in accordance with those directives. during that period, such seeds shall not be marketed in the territory of
other member states.
iv. neum
 l : council directive //ec of  december  laying down the principles governing the organisation
of veterinary checks on products entering the community from third countries (oj l , .., p. ).
article  is replaced by the following:
‘article 
. veterinary checks on products from third countries introduced into one of the territories listed in annex i shall
be carried out by member states in accordance with this directive and with regulation (ec) no / of the
european parliament and of the council of  april  on official controls performed to ensure the verification
of compliance with feed and food law, animal health and animal welfare rules (*).
. by way of derogation from paragraph , consignments of products coming from the territory of croatia and
transiting through the territory of bosnia and herzegovina at neum (‘neum corridor’) before re-entering the territory
of croatia via the points of entry at klek or zaton doli, may be exempted from veterinary checks, subject to
compliance with the following requirements:
(a) croatia shall have in place, on or before the date of accession, points of entry to the north and south of the
neum corridor that are equipped, staffed and prepared to ensure compliance with the requirements of this
paragraph;
(b) croatia shall ensure that:
(i) only closed vehicles are used for transporting the consignments;
(ii) vehicles transporting consignments are sealed with uniquely numbered seals before transiting the neum
corridor;
(iii) a register is made, detailing which numbered seals have been attached to which vehicles, which allows for
the necessary checks;
(iv) the date and time of leaving and re-entering the territory of croatia of the vehicles transporting
consignments are recorded, so that the total time of transit can be calculated;
(c) croatia shall ensure that consignments are not allowed to re-enter croatia's territory where:
(i) a vehicle's seal has been broken or replaced during transit through the neum corridor; and/or
(ii) the total time of transit considerably exceeds the acceptable total time of transit, given the total distance of
transit unless the competent authority has carried out an assessment of the risks to animal and public health
and has adopted effective, proportionate and targeted measures based on that assessment;
.. official en journal of the european union l /
(d) croatia shall regularly and as necessary inform the commission of any non-compliance with the requirements of
point (b) and of the measures it has taken under point (c);
(e) where necessary, a decision to suspend or withdraw the derogation from paragraph  shall be adopted in
accordance with the procedure laid down in article ;
(f) where necessary, detailed rules for the application of this paragraph may be adopted in accordance with the
procedure laid down in article .
___________
(*) oj l , .., p. .’.
. fisheries
 r : council regulation (ec) no / of  december  concerning management measures for the
sustainable exploitation of fishery resources in the mediterranean sea, amending regulation (eec) no / and
repealing regulation (ec) no / (oj l , .., p. . corrected version in oj l , .., p. ).
(a) by way of derogation from article () and (), at depths of less than  metres, vessels registered and operating
only in the western istria region shall be temporarily allowed, until  june , to use bottom trawls at a
minimum distance of , nautical miles from the coast.
this derogation shall apply in the area designated as western istria, defined from the point with geographic coordinates φ=. and λ=. with a line due north and a line due west.
for vessels the overall length of which is less than  metres, at depths of over  metres croatia shall be temporarily
allowed, until  june , to use bottom trawls at a minimum distance of  nautical mile from the coast,
maintaining all other spatial and temporal restrictions applied on the date of accession.
(b) by way of derogation from article (), a limited number of vessels included in the specific category of noncommercial fisheries ‘small scale artisanal fishing for personal needs’, which shall not exceed   vessels, shall be
allowed to use maximum  metres of gillnets until  december , provided that all other restrictions in place
on the date of accession continue to apply. croatia shall submit to the commission on the date of accession, at the
latest, the list of vessels covered by this transitional period, including their characteristics and capacity, expressed in
terms of gt and kw.
. transport policy
.  r : council regulation (eec) no / of  december  applying the principle of freedom to
provide services to maritime transport within member states (maritime cabotage) (oj l , .., p. ).
in article , the following paragraphs are added:
‘. by way of derogation from the second subparagraph of article (), public service contracts concluded before
the date of croatia's accession may continue to be applied until  december .
. by way of derogation from article (), until  december , cruise services carried out between croatian
ports by ships smaller than  gross tonnes shall be reserved to ships registered in, and flying the flag of, croatia,
which are operated by shipping companies, established in accordance with croatian law, and whose principal place of
business is situated, and effective control exercised, in croatia.
. by way of derogation from article (), and for the transitional period until  december , the
commission may, upon a substantiated request by a member state, decide, within  working days of receipt of
the relevant request, that ships benefiting from the derogation set out in paragraph  of this article shall not carry out
cruise services between ports of certain areas of a member state other than croatia where it is demonstrated that the
operation of these services seriously disturbs or threatens to seriously disturb the internal transport market in the areas
concerned. if after the period of  working days the commission has taken no decision, the member state concerned
shall be entitled to apply safeguard measures until the commission has taken its decision. in the event of an
emergency, the member state may unilaterally adopt appropriate provisional measures which may remain in force
for no more than three months. that member state shall immediately inform the commission thereof. the
commission may abrogate the measures or confirm them until it takes its final decision. member states shall be
kept informed.’.
.  r : regulation (ec) no / of the european parliament and of the council of  october 
on common rules for access to the international road haulage market (recast) (oj l , .., p. ).
by way of derogation from article  of regulation (ec) no /, the following shall apply:
— for a period of two years from the date of croatia's accession, undertakings established in croatia shall be excluded
from cabotage in the other member states,
l / en official journal of the european union ..
— for a period of two years from the date of croatia's accession, other member states may notify the commission
whether they intend to prolong the transitional period referred to in the first indent for a maximum of two years
or whether they intend to apply article  in relation to undertakings established in croatia. in the absence of such
notification, article  shall apply,
— any of the present member states may at any time during a period of two years from the date of croatia's
accession notify the commission of its intention to apply article  in relation to undertakings established in
croatia,
— only carriers established in member states where article  applies in relation to undertakings established in croatia
may perform cabotage in croatia,
— for a period of four years from the date of croatia's accession, any member state applying article  may, in case of
serious disturbance of its national market or parts thereof due to or aggravated by cabotage, such as serious excess
of supply over demand or a threat to the financial stability or survival of a significant number of road haulage
undertakings, request the commission to suspend in whole or in part the application of article  in relation to
undertakings established in croatia. in this case, article  shall apply.
member states that apply the transitional measure referred to in the first and second indents of the first paragraph
may progressively exchange cabotage authorisations on the basis of bilateral agreements with croatia.
the transitional arrangements referred to in the first and second paragraphs shall not lead to more restrictive access for
croatian carriers to cabotage in any member state than that prevailing at the time of the signature of the treaty of
accession.
. taxation
.  l : council directive //eec of  october  on the approximation of taxes on cigarettes
(oj l , .., p. ).
in article (), the following subparagraph is added:
‘croatia shall be allowed a transitional period until  december  in order to reach the requirements laid down
in the first and second subparagraphs. however, as of  january  the excise duty shall not be less than eur 
per   cigarettes irrespective of the weighted average retail selling price.’.
.  l : council directive //ec of  november  on the common system of value added tax (oj
l , .., p. ).
(a) article () is replaced by the following:
‘. member states may regard activities, exempt under articles , ,  and , articles  to ,
article (), article () or articles  to c, engaged in by bodies governed by public law as activities in
which those bodies engage as public authorities.’.
(b) article ()(b) is replaced by the following:
‘(b) where the consideration is lower than the open market value and the supplier does not have a full right of
deduction under articles  to  and articles  to  and the supply is subject to an exemption
under articles , , , , , , , (), () or articles  to c;’.
(c) article , point (a), is replaced by the following:
‘(a) the supply of goods used solely for an activity exempted under articles , , , ,  and ,
article (), article () and articles  to c, if those goods have not given rise to deductibility;’.
(d) article () is replaced by the following:
‘. member states may release taxable persons from the obligation laid down in article () or in
article a to issue an invoice in respect of supplies of goods or services which they have made in their
territory and which are exempt, with or without deductibility of the vat paid in the preceding stage, pursuant
to articles  and , article (), article , article (), article , points (h) to (l) of article (),
articles , , ,  and , articles () and () and articles  to c.’.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
(e) the following article is inserted:
‘article c
croatia may, in accordance with the conditions applying in that member state on the date of its accession,
continue to exempt the following transactions:
(a) the supply of building land, with or without buildings built on it, as referred to in point (j) of article ()
and in point () of annex x, part b, non-renewable, until  december ;
(b) the international transport of passengers, as referred to in point () of annex x, part b, for as long as the
same exemption is applied in any of the member states which were members of the union before the
accession of croatia.’.
(f) article  is replaced by the following:
‘article 
member states which exempt the transactions referred to in articles , ,  or , article (),
article () or articles  to c may grant taxable persons the right to opt for taxation of those transactions.’.
(g) the title of annex x (also, correspondingly, in the table of contents) is replaced by the following:
‘list of transactions covered by the derogations referred to in articles  and
 and articles  to c’.
. freedom, security and justice
 r : regulation (ec) no / of the european parliament and of the council of  march 
establishing a community code on the rules governing the movement of persons across borders (schengen borders
code) (oj l , .., p. ).
the following article is inserted:
‘article a
by way of derogation from the provisions of this regulation relating to the establishment of border crossing points,
and until the entry into force of a decision by the council on the full application of the provisions of the schengen
acquis in croatia pursuant to article () of the act of accession or until this regulation is amended to include
provisions governing border control at common border crossing points, whichever is the earlier, croatia may
maintain the common border crossing points at its border with bosnia and herzegovina. at these common
border crossing points, border guards of one party shall carry out entry and exit checks on the territory of the
other party. all entry and exit checks by croatian border guards shall be carried out in compliance with the acquis of
the union, including member states’ obligations as regards international protection and non-refoulement. the
relevant bilateral agreements establishing the common border crossing points in question shall, if necessary, be
amended to that end.’.
. environment
i. horizontal legislation
.  l : directive //ec of the european parliament and of the council of  october  establishing
a scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the community and amending council directive
//ec (oj l , .., p. ).
(a) with regard to the inclusion of all flights between two aerodromes situated in the croatian territory, and all flights
between an aerodrome situated in the croatian territory and an aerodrome situated in a country outside the eea
area (hereinafter referred to as ‘additional aviation activities’), the following shall apply:
(i) by way of derogation from article c(), the period referred to in article () and beginning on  january
 shall start on  january  for the additional aviation activities.
(ii) by way of derogation from article c(), the commission shall decide, following the procedure referred to in
that same provision, on the historical aviation emissions for the additional aviation activities within a period
of six months from the date of accession.
(iii) by way of derogation from article d(), from  january , the percentage of allowances to be auctioned
for the additional aviation activities shall be the proportion of the allowances remaining after having
calculated the number of allowances to be allocated free of charge under point (d) of article e() and
the number of allowances to be set aside in a special reserve under article f.
(iv) by way of derogation from article d(), the attributed aviation emissions from additional aviation activities
shall be decided upon by the commission for the reference year  on the basis of the best available data.
the number of allowances to be auctioned by member states whose total attributed aviation emissions
include those from flights arriving from a croatian aerodrome, shall be adjusted from  july , in order
to reallocate auctioning rights related to these emissions, to croatia.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
(v) by way of derogation from article e(), the monitoring year for the additional aviation activities shall be
 and any application for an allocation of allowances shall be made to the croatian competent authorities by  march .
(vi) by way of derogation from article e(), croatia shall submit to the commission applications related to the
additional aviation activities by  july .
(vii) by way of derogation from article e(), the commission shall adopt a decision on the matters referred to in
points (a) to (e) thereof, in relation to the additional aviation activities by  september .
(viii) by way of derogation from point (d) of article e(), for the additional aviation activities, the number of
allowances to be allocated free of charge shall be calculated by multiplying the benchmark specified in point
(e) by the sum of the tonne-kilometre data included in the applications submitted to the commission in
accordance with article e() adjusted to account for the average change in aviation tonne-kilometre activity
covered by the eu ets relative to  levels. if necessary, the benchmark may be subject to a uniform
correction factor to be applied by the commission.
(ix) by way of derogation from article e(), for the additional aviation activities, the benchmark referred to in
point (e) thereof shall be the same as that calculated for aviation activities covered by the eu ets from
 january .
(x) by way of derogation from article e(), the date of issue of allowances for the additional aviation activities
shall be  february .
(xi) by way of derogation from article f, with regard to additional aviation activities, any reference to the
second calendar year of the period starting in  shall be read as a reference to  and any references
to the third calendar year of that period shall be read as a reference to .
(xii) by way of derogation from article (), for the additional aviation activities, the date set therein shall be
 july .
(xiii) by way of derogation from article a(), the reattribution of administrative responsibilities for aircraft
operators to croatia shall take place during the year , after fulfilment by the operator of its 
obligations, unless a different date is agreed between the former administering authority and croatia
following a request by the aircraft operator within six months of publication of the commission's
updated list of operators which takes into account croatia's accession. in this case, reallocation shall take
place no later than the year  with regard to the trading period beginning in .
(xiv) by way of derogation from point  of annex i, additional aviation activities shall be included as of  january
.
(b) without prejudice to the above derogations, croatia shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative
provisions necessary to ensure that it can comply with the directive as of accession for the whole year .
.  r : commission regulation (eu) no / of  october  for a standardised and secured system
of registries pursuant to directive //ec of the european parliament and of the council and decision no
//ec of the european parliament and of the council (oj l , .., p. ).
articles , , ,  and , and annex viii, relating to the aviation activities, shall apply in croatia as of  january
.
ii. air quality
 l : directive //ec of the european parliament and of the council of  may  on ambient air
quality and cleaner air for europe (oj l , .., p. ).
(a) by way of derogation from annex xiv, the reference year of point a, first paragraph shall be the second year after the
end of the year of croatia’s accession. the average exposure indicator for that reference year shall be the mean
concentration of the year of accession and the first and second year after the year of accession.
(b) by way of derogation from annex xiv, point b, the exposure reduction target shall be calculated in relation to the
average exposure indicator in the reference year which is the second year after the end of the year of croatia's
accession.
iii. waste management
 l : council directive //ec of  april  on the landfill of waste (oj l , .., p. ).
(a) by way of derogation from points (a), (b) and (c) of the first subparagraph of article (), the requirement to reduce
the amount of biodegradable municipal waste going to landfills to respectively  %,  % and  % of the total
amount (by weight) of biodegradable municipal waste produced in  shall apply in croatia in accordance with the
deadlines specified below.
croatia shall ensure a gradual decrease in the amount of biodegradable municipal waste going to landfills according to
the following scheme:
.. official en journal of the european union l /
(i) by  december , the share of biodegradable municipal waste deposited on landfills shall be reduced to
 % of the total amount (by weight) of biodegradable municipal waste produced in ;
(ii) by  december , the share of biodegradable municipal waste deposited on landfills shall be reduced to
 % of the total amount (by weight) of biodegradable municipal waste produced in ;
(iii) by  december , the share of biodegradable municipal waste deposited on landfills shall be reduced to
 % of the total amount (by weight) of biodegradable municipal waste produced in .
(b) by way of derogation from article (c), all existing landfills in croatia shall comply with the requirements of the
directive by  december  with the exception of the requirements laid down in annex i, point .
croatia shall ensure a gradual reduction of waste landfilled in existing non-compliant landfills in accordance with the
following annual maximum quantities:
— by  december :    tonnes,
— by  december :    tonnes,
— by  december :    tonnes,
— by  december :    tonnes,
— by  december :   tonnes.
by  december of each year, starting with the year of accession, croatia shall provide the commission with a report
concerning the gradual implementation of the directive and compliance with intermediate targets.
iv. water quality
.  l : council directive //eec of  may  concerning urban waste water treatment (oj l ,
.., p. ).
by way of derogation from articles , , ,  and , the requirements for collecting systems and treatment of urban
waste water shall apply in croatia as of  january , in accordance with the following intermediate targets:
(a) by  december , compliance with the directive shall be achieved in agglomerations with a population
equivalent of more than  , except for the following coastal agglomerations:
bibinje - sukošan,
biograd,
jelsa - vrboska,
makarska,
mali lošinj,
malinska - njivice,
nin,
pirovac - tisno - jezera,
pula - sjever,
vela luka,
vir.
(b) by  december , compliance with the directive shall be achieved in agglomerations with a population
equivalent of more than   whose waste water is discharged into sensitive areas, as well as for treatment
plants which are situated in the relevant catchment areas of the danube and of other sensitive areas and that
contribute to the pollution of these areas, and in the  coastal agglomerations listed in point (a).
(c) by  december , compliance with the directive shall be achieved in agglomerations with a population
equivalent of more than  .
.  l : council directive //ec of  november  on the quality of water intended for human
consumption (oj l , .., p. ).
l / en official journal of the european union ..
by way of derogation, the microbiological parameters and indicator parameters laid down, respectively, in annex i —
parts a and c shall apply to the following water supply zones in croatia as of  january :
water supply zone area no. population nuts code
da bjelovar    hr
da daruvar    hr
da đurđevac    hr
da gorski kotar    hr
da hrvatsko zagorje    hr
da istočna slavonija - slavonski brod    hr
da istra    hr
da jastrebarsko-klinča sela    hr
da karlovac-duga resa    hr
da knin    hr
da koprivnica    hr
da križevci    hr
da lapac    hr
da lička jesenica    hr
da našice    hr
da neretva-pelješackorčula-lastovo-mljet    hr
da ogulin    hr
da opatija-rijeka-krk    hr
da otočac    hr
da ozalj    hr
da petrinja-sisak    hr
da pisarovina    hr
da pitomača    hr
da požeštine    hr
da sveti ivan zelina    hr
da udbina-korenica    hr
da varaždin    hr
da velika gorica    hr
da zagreb    hr
da zaprešić    hr
da zrmanja-zadar    hr
da žrnovnica    hr
.. official en journal of the european union l /
v. integrated pollution prevention and control (ippc)
.  l : council directive //ec of  march  on the limitation of emissions of volatile organic
compounds due to the use of organic solvents in certain activities and installations (oj l , .., p. ).
(a) by way of derogation from article  and annexes iia and iib, the emission limit values of volatile organic
compounds due to the use of organic solvents in certain activities and installations shall apply to the following
installations in croatia as of the dates mentioned below:
(i) as of  january :
. čateks, dioničko društvo za proizvodnju tkanine, umjetne kože, kućanskog rublja i proizvoda za šport i
rekreaciju (čateks d.d.), čakovec, ulica zrinsko-frankopanska 
. drvna industrija klana d.d. (di klana d.d.), klana, klana .
(ii) as of  january :
. hempel društvo s ograničenom odgovornošću prerađivačka kemijska industrija (hempel d.o.o.), umag,
novigradska ulica 
. aluflexpack, proizvodno, trgovačko, export-import društvo s ograničenom odgovornošću (aluflexpack, d.o.o.), zadar, murvica bb - pogon zadar (zadar facility, location: zadar, murvica bb)
. aluflexpack, proizvodno, trgovačko, export-import društvo s ograničenom odgovornošću (aluflexpack, d.o.o.), zadar, murvica bb - pogon umag (umag facility, location: umag, ungarija bb).
(iii) as of  january :
. palma društvo s ograničenom odgovornošću za proizvodnju pogrebnih potrepština (palma d.o.o.),
jastrebarsko, donja reka 
. ferro-preis društvo s ograničenom odgovornošću za proizvodnju lijevanih, kovanih i prešanih metalnih
proizvoda (ferro-preis d.o.o.), čakovec, dr. tome bratkovića 
. ad plastik dioničko društvo za proizvodnju dijelova i pribora za motorna vozila i proizvoda iz
plastičnih masa (ad plastik d.d.), solin, matoševa ulica  - location: zagreb, jankomir 
. remont željezničkih vozila bjelovar društvo s ograničenom odgovornošću (ržv d.o.o.),
bjelovar, trg kralja tomislava 
. ferokotao d.o.o. za proizvodnju transformatorskih kotlova i ostalih metalnih konstrukcija
(ferokotao d.o.o.), kolodvorska bb, donji kraljevec
. same deutz-fahr žetelice, društvo s ograničenom odgovornošću za proizvodnju i usluge (same
deutz-fahr žetelice d.o.o.), županja, industrijska 
. cmc sisak d.o.o. za proizvodnju i usluge (cmc sisak d.o.o.), sisak, braće kavurića 
. metalska industrija varaždin dioničko društvo (miv d.d.), varaždin, fabijanska ulica 
. chromos boje i lakovi, dioničko društvo za proizvodnju boja i lakova (chromos boje i lakovi,
d.d.), zagreb, radnička cesta /d
. chromos-svjetlost, tvornica boja i lakova, društvo s ograničenom odgovornošću (chromossvjetlost d.o.o.), lužani, mijata stojanovića 
. muraplast društvo s ograničenom odgovornošću za proizvodnju i preradu plastičnih masa (muraplast d.o.o.), kotoriba, industrijska zona bb
. istraplastika dioničko društvo za proizvodnju ambalaže (istraplastika d.d.), pazin, dubravica /a
. grudina društvo s ograničenom odgovornošću za proizvodnju i usluge (grudina d.o.o.), županja,
aleja matice hrvatske 
. slavica - kemijska čistionica, vlasnik slavica hinek, beli manastir, j. j. strossmayera 
. mida d.o.o. za usluge i ugostiteljstvo (mida d.o.o.), osijek, ivana gundulića 
. express kemijska čistiona, vlasnik ivanka drčec, križevci, ulica petra preradovića 
. kemijska čistionica "biser", vlasnik gojko miletić, dubrovnik, nikole tesle 
. kemijska čistionica "elegant", vlasnik frane miletić, dubrovnik, andrije hebranga 
. kolar obrt za kemijsko čišćenje odjeće, vlasnik svjetlana kolar, žakanje, kamanje /a
l / en official journal of the european union ..
. mm d.o.o. za trgovinu i usluge (mm d.o.o.), draganić, lug 
. kemijska čistiona "agata", vlasnik branko szabo, virovitica, s. radića 
. obrt za kemijsko čišćenje odjeća "keky", vlasnik jovita malek-milovanović, pula, dubrovačke bratovštine

. lorna d.o.o. za pranje i kemijsko čišćenje tekstila i krznenih proizvoda (lorna d.o.o.), pula, valdebečki
put 
. kemijska čistionica i kopiranje ključeva "šuper", vlasnik ivan šuper, virovitica, j.j. strossmayera 
. kemijsko čišćenje štefanec kemijsko čišćenje tekstila i krznenih proizvoda, vlasnik nadica štefanec,
koprivnica, ledinska a
. aries društvo s ograničenom odgovornošću za proizvodnju glazbala i usluge (aries d.o.o.), varaždin,
creska 
. obrt za pranje i čišćenje tekstila i odjeće đorđević, vlasnik javorka đorđević, makarska,
ante starčevića 
. obrt za usluge pranja i kemijskog čišćenja "kordić", vlasnik pero kordić, makarska, kipara
rendića 
. kemijsko čišćenje tekstila i krznenih proizvoda čistionica galeb, vlasnik stipan radović, zadar,
varoška 
. kemijska čistionica, vlasnik krešimir borovec, varaždin, juraja habdelića 
. kemijska čistionica "vbm", vlasnik biserka posavec, maruševec, biljevec 
. obrt za kemijsko čišćenje i pranje rublja "plitvice", vlasnik momirka ninić, pula, rizzijeva 
. "ana" kemijska čistiona, vlasnik saša dadić, pula, zagrebačka 
. kemijska čistionica, vlasnik gordana bralić, trogir, put demunta 
. "economatic" - praonica rublja, vlasnik marino bassanese, umag, savudrijska cesta 
. servis za čišćenje "sjaj", vlasnik danijela brković, virovitica, golo brdo a.
(b) by way of derogation from article ()(b), the obligation for the operator to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
competent authority that the best available techniques are being used for coating processes in shipbuilding with
regard to the following installations in croatia shall apply as of  january :
. brodotrogir d.d., trogir, put brodograditelja 
. ncp-nautički centar prgin-remontno brodogradilište šibenik d.o.o. za remont i proizvodnju
brodova (ncp - remontno brodogradilište šibenik d.o.o.), šibenik, obala jerka šižgorića 
. brodogradilište viktor lenac dioničko društvo (brodogradilište viktor lenac d.d.), rijeka,
martinšćica bb
. . maj brodogradilište d.d., rijeka, liburnijska 
. brodosplit-brodogradilište društvo s ograničenom odgovornošću (brodosplit-brodogradilište
d.o.o.), split, put supavla 
. uljanik brodogradilište, d.d., pula, flaciusova .
.  l : directive //ec of the european parliament and of the council of  october  on the
limitation of emissions of certain pollutants into the air from large combustion plants (oj l , .., p. ).
by way of derogation from article () and (), the emission limit values for sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxides and dust
shall apply to the following plants in croatia as of  january :
. belišće d.d., belišće: steam boilers k+k ( mw)
. dioki d.d., zagreb: steam boiler sg c ( mw)
. hep-proizvodnja d.o.o., zagreb, te plomin : steam boiler ( mw)
. te plomin d.o.o., plomin, te plomin : steam boiler ( mw)
. hep-proizvodnja d.o.o., zagreb, te rijeka: steam boiler ( mw)
.. official en journal of the european union l /
. hep-proizvodnja d.o.o., zagreb, te sisak - block : steam boilers a+b ( mw)
. hep-proizvodnja d.o.o., zagreb, te sisak - block : steam boilers a+b ( mw)
. hep-proizvodnja d.o.o., zagreb, te-to zagreb: consisting of block c steam boiler k, hot water boilers vk , vk
, vk , vk  and steam boiler pk  (total:  mw)
. hep-proizvodnja d.o.o., zagreb, el-to zagreb: consisting of block  mw with steam boilers k (k) and k
(k), block  mw with steam boiler k (k), hot water boilers wk  and wk , and steam boiler k (k) (total:
 mw)
. hep-proizvodnja d.o.o., zagreb, te-to osijek: steam boilers k+k (total:  mw).
.  l : directive //ec of the european parliament and of the council of  january  concerning
integrated pollution prevention and control (codified version) (oj l , .., p. ).
by way of derogation from article (), the requirements for the granting of permits for existing installations shall
apply to the following installations in croatia as of the date indicated for each installation, insofar as the obligation to
operate these installations in accordance with emission limit values, equivalent parameters or technical measures, based
on the best available techniques according to article , point , is concerned:
(a) as of  january :
. našicecement tvornica cementa, dioničko društvo (našicecement d.d. našice), našice, tajnovac , ippc
activity ..
. lipik glas za proizvodnju stakla društvo s ograničenom odgovornošću (lipik glas d.o.o.), lipik, staklanska
b.b., ippc activity ..
. koka peradarsko prehrambena industrija dioničko društvo (koka d.d.), varaždin, jalkovečka ulica bb – farma
br.  (farm no., location: čakovec, totovec), ippc activity ..a.
. žito d.o.o. za proizvodnju i trgovinu (žito d.o.o.), osijek, đakovština  - farma forkuševci (farm forkuševci),
ippc activity ..c.
. žito d.o.o. za proizvodnju i trgovinu (žito d.o.o.), osijek, đakovština  - farma v. branjevina (farm v.
branjevina), ippc activity ..c.
. drvna industrija klana d.d. (di klana d.d.), klana, klana , ippc activity ..
. čateks, dioničko društvo za proizvodnju tkanine, umjetne kože, kućanskog rublja i proizvoda za šport i
rekreaciju (čateks d.d.), čakovec, ulica zrinsko-frankopanska , ippc activity ..
(b) as of  january :
. cimos ljevaonica roč d.o.o. proizvodnja aluminijskih odljevaka (cimos ljevaonica roč d.o.o.), roč,
stanica roč , ippc activity ..b.
. p. p. c. buzet društvo s ograničenom odgovornošću za proizvodnju, trgovinu i usluge (p. p. c. buzet
d.o.o.), buzet, most , ippc activity ..b.
. vetropack straža tvornica stakla d.d. hum na sutli (vetropack straža d.d. hum na sutli), hum na sutli, hum
na sutli , ippc activity ..
. koka peradarsko prehrambena industrija dioničko društvo (koka d.d.), varaždin, jalkovečka ulica bb -
pogon mesa (meat facility), ippc activity ..a.
. sladorana tvornica šećera dioničko društvo (sladorana d.d.), županja, šećerana , ippc activity
..b.
. koka peradarsko prehrambena industrija dioničko društvo (koka d.d.), varaždin, jalkovečka ulica bb –
farma br.  (farm no. , location: donji martijanec, vrbanovec), ippc activity ..a.
. žito d.o.o. za proizvodnju i trgovinu (žito d.o.o.), osijek, đakovština  - farma slaščak (farm slaščak), ippc
activity ..b.
. žito d.o.o. za proizvodnju i trgovinu (žito d.o.o.), osijek, đakovština  - farma magadenovac (farm
magadenovac), ippc activity ..c.
. aluflexpack, proizvodno, trgovačko, export-import društvo s ograničenom odgovornošću (aluflexpack,
d.o.o.), zadar, murvica bb - pogon umag (umag facility, location: umag, ungarija bb), ippc activity ..
. aluflexpack, proizvodno, trgovačko, export-import društvo s ograničenom odgovornošću (aluflexpack,
d.o.o.), zadar, murvica bb - pogon zadar (zadar facility, location: zadar, murvica bb), ippc activity ..
l / en official journal of the european union ..
. hempel društvo s ograničenom odgovornošću prerađivačka kemijska industrija (hempel d.o.o.), umag,
novigradska ulica , ippc activity ..
. belišće dioničko društvo za proizvodnju papira, kartonske ambalaže, strojeva, primarnu i finalnu preradu
drva i suhu destilaciju drva (belišće d.d.), belišće, trg ante starčevića  - except steam boilers k and k
(transitional period until  december , see below), ippc activity ..b.
. maziva-zagreb d.o.o. za proizvodnju i trgovinu mazivima i srodnim proizvodima (maziva-zagreb
d.o.o.), zagreb, radnička cesta , ippc activity ..
(c) as of  july :
gavrilović prva hrvatska tvornica salame, sušena mesa i masti m. gavrilovića potomci, d.o.o. (gavrilović
d.o.o.), petrinja, gavrilovićev trg  - pogon klaonice: papkari, rezanje i prerada mesa i proizvodnja prerađevina od
peradi i papkara, te skladištenje mesa (facility for animal slaughter: hoof animals, cutting and processing of meat
and production of processed products from poultry and hoof animals, and storage of meat), ippc activity ..a.
(d) as of  january :
. ferro-preis društvo s ograničenom odgovornošću za proizvodnju lijevanih, kovanih i prešanih metalnih
proizvoda (ferro-preis d.o.o.), čakovec, dr. tome bratkovića , ippc activity ..
. cemex hrvatska dioničko društvo za proizvodnju i prodaju cementa i drugih građevinskih materijala (cemex
hrvatska d.d.), kaštel sućurac, cesta dr. franje tuđmana bb - pogon sv. kajo (sv. kajo facility), ippc activity
..
. cemex hrvatska dioničko društvo za proizvodnju i prodaju cementa i drugih građevinskih materijala (cemex
hrvatska d.d.), kaštel sućurac, cesta dr. franje tuđmana bb - pogon sv. juraj (sv. juraj facility), ippc activity
..
. cemex hrvatska dioničko društvo za proizvodnju i prodaju cementa i drugih građevinskih materijala (cemex
hrvatska d.d.), kaštel sućurac, cesta dr. franje tuđmana bb - pogon . kolovoza (. kolovoza facility), ippc
activity ..
. kio keramika d.o.o. za proizvodnju keramičkih pločica - "u stečaju" (kio keramika d.o.o. - "u stečaju"),
orahovica, v. nazora bb - pogon orahovica (orahovica facility, location: orahovica, v. nazora bb), ippc
activity ..
. kio keramika d.o.o. za proizvodnju keramičkih pločica - "u stečaju" (kio keramika d.o.o. - "u stečaju"),
orahovica, v. nazora bb - pogon rujevac (rujevac facility, location: dvor, rujevac bb), ippc activity ..
. pliva hrvatska d.o.o. za razvoj, proizvodnju i prodaju lijekova i farmaceutskih proizvoda (pliva
hrvatska d.o.o.), zagreb, prilaz baruna filipovića  - pogon savski marof (savski marof facility,
location: prigorje brdovečko, prudnička ), ippc activity ..
. puris, poljoprivredna, prehrambena, trgovačka i ugostiteljska djelatnost, dioničko društvo (puris d.d.), pazin,
hrvatskog narodnog preporoda  - mesna industrija (meat industry, location: sv. petar u šumi), ippc activity
. a and b.
. koka peradarsko prehrambena industrija dioničko društvo (koka d.d.), varaždin, jalkovečka ulica bb –
farma br.  (farm no. , location: petrijanec-nova ves), ippc activity ..a.
. puris, poljoprivredna, prehrambena, trgovačka i ugostiteljska djelatnost, dioničko društvo (puris d.d.), pazin,
hrvatskog narodnog preporoda  - farma sv. petar u šumi  (farm sv. petar u šumi , location: sveti petar u
šumi), ippc activity ..a.
. puris, poljoprivredna, prehrambena, trgovačka i ugostiteljska djelatnost, dioničko društvo (puris d.d.), pazin,
hrvatskog narodnog preporoda  - farma sv. petar u šumi  (farm sv. petar u šumi , location: sveti petar u
šumi), ippc activity ..a.
. puris, poljoprivredna, prehrambena, trgovačka i ugostiteljska djelatnost, dioničko društvo (puris d.d.), pazin,
hrvatskog narodnog preporoda  - farma barban (farm barban, location: barban), ippc activity ..a.
. puris, poljoprivredna, prehrambena, trgovačka i ugostiteljska djelatnost, dioničko društvo (puris d.d.), pazin,
hrvatskog narodnog preporoda  - farma muntrilj (farm muntrilj, location: muntrilj), ippc activity ..a.
. puris, poljoprivredna, prehrambena, trgovačka i ugostiteljska djelatnost, dioničko društvo (puris d.d.), pazin,
hrvatskog narodnog preporoda  - farma šikuti (farm šikuti, location: svetvinčenat), ippc activity ..a.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
. puris, poljoprivredna, prehrambena, trgovačka i ugostiteljska djelatnost, dioničko društvo (puris d.d.), pazin,
hrvatskog narodnog preporoda  - farma žminj  (farm žminj , location: žminj), ippc activity ..a.
. puris, poljoprivredna, prehrambena, trgovačka i ugostiteljska djelatnost, dioničko društvo (puris d.d.), pazin,
hrvatskog narodnog preporoda  - farma surani  (farm surani , location: tinjani, surani), ippc activity
..a.
. puris, poljoprivredna, prehrambena, trgovačka i ugostiteljska djelatnost, dioničko društvo (puris d.d.), pazin,
hrvatskog narodnog preporoda  - farma pilati (farm pilati, location: lovrin, pilati), ippc activity ..a.
. puris, poljoprivredna, prehrambena, trgovačka i ugostiteljska djelatnost, dioničko društvo (puris d.d.), pazin,
hrvatskog narodnog preporoda  - farma škropeti  (farm škropeti , location: škropeti), ippc activity ..a.
. puris, poljoprivredna, prehrambena, trgovačka i ugostiteljska djelatnost, dioničko društvo (puris d.d.), pazin,
hrvatskog narodnog preporoda  - farma katun  (farm katun , location: trviz, katun trviski), ippc activity
..a.
. puris, poljoprivredna, prehrambena, trgovačka i ugostiteljska djelatnost, dioničko društvo (puris d.d.), pazin,
hrvatskog narodnog preporoda  - farma srbinjak (farm srbinjak, location: jakovici, srbinjak), ippc activity
..a.
. ad plastik dioničko društvo za proizvodnju dijelova i pribora za motorna vozila i proizvoda iz plastičnih
masa (ad plastik d.d.), solin, matoševa ulica  - location: zagreb, jankomir , ippc activity ..
. brodosplit-brodogradilište društvo s ograničenom odgovornošću (brodosplit-brodogradilište d.o.o.), split, put supavla , ippc activity ..
. chromos boje i lakovi, dioničko društvo za proizvodnju boja i lakova (chromos boje i lakovi, d.d.),
zagreb, radnička cesta /d, ippc activity ..
. muraplast društvo s ograničenom odgovornošću za proizvodnju i preradu plastičnih masa (muraplast
d.o.o.), kotoriba, industrijska zona bb, ippc activity ..
. . maj brodogradilište d.d., rijeka, liburnijska , ippc activity ..
. chromos-svjetlost, tvornica boja i lakova, društvo s ograničenom odgovornošću (chromossvjetlost d.o.o.), lužani, mijata stojanovića , ippc activity ..
. brodotrogir d.d., trogir, put brodograditelja , ippc activity ..
. uljanik brodogradilište, d.d., pula, flaciusova , ippc activity ..
(e) as of  january :
. metalska industrija varaždin dioničko društvo (miv d.d.), varaždin, fabijanska ulica , ippc activity
..
. kandit premijer d.o.o. za proizvodnju, promet i usluge (kandit premijer d.o.o.), osijek, frankopanska
, ippc activity ..b.
. koka peradarsko prehrambena industrija dioničko društvo (koka d.d.), varaždin, jalkovečka ulica bb – farma
br.  (farm no. , location: čakovec, totovec), ippc activity ..a.
. žito d.o.o. za proizvodnju i trgovinu (žito d.o.o.), osijek, đakovština  – farma lužani (farm lužani), ippc
activity ..b.
(f) as of  january :
. belišće dioničko društvo za proizvodnju papira, kartonske ambalaže, strojeva, primarnu i finalnu preradu
drva i suhu destilaciju drva (belišće d.d.), belišće, trg ante starčevića  – parni kotao k, parni kotao k
(steam boiler k, steam boiler k), ippc activity . (this only concerns steam boilers k and k).
. hep-proizvodnja d.o.o. za proizvodnju električne i toplinske energije (hep-proizvodnja d.o.o.), zagreb, ulica
grada vukovara  – kte jertovec (jertovec combined-cycle power plant, location: konjšćina, jertovec,
jertovec ), ippc activity ..
. hep-proizvodnja d.o.o. za proizvodnju električne i toplinske energije (hep-proizvodnja d.o.o.), zagreb, ulica
grada vukovara  - te plomin  (thermal power plant plomin , location: plomin, plomin bb), ippc activity
..
. te plomin društvo s ograničenom odgovornošću za proizvodnju električne energije (te plomin d.o.o.),
plomin, plomin bb - te plomin  (thermal power plant plomin , location: plomin, plomin bb), ippc activity
..
l / en official journal of the european union ..
. hep-proizvodnja d.o.o. za proizvodnju električne i toplinske energije (hep-proizvodnja d.o.o.), zagreb, ulica
grada vukovara  - el-to zagreb (zagreb power plant - heating station, location: zagreb, zagorska ), ippc
activity ..
. hep-proizvodnja d.o.o. za proizvodnju električne i toplinske energije (hep-proizvodnja d.o.o.), zagreb, ulica
grada vukovara  - te-to zagreb (zagreb thermal power plant - heating station, location: zagreb,
kuševačka  a), ippc activity ..
. hep-proizvodnja d.o.o. za proizvodnju električne i toplinske energije (hep-proizvodnja d.o.o.), zagreb, ulica
grada vukovara  - te sisak (sisak thermal power plant, location: sisak, čret bb), ippc activity ..
. hep-proizvodnja d.o.o. za proizvodnju električne i toplinske energije (hep-proizvodnja d.o.o.), zagreb, ulica
grada vukovara  - te-to osijek (osijek thermal power plant - heating station, location: osijek, martina
divalta ), ippc activity ..
. hep-proizvodnja d.o.o. za proizvodnju električne i toplinske energije (hep-proizvodnja d.o.o.), zagreb, ulica
grada vukovara  - te rijeka (rijeka thermal power plant, location: kostrena, urinj bb), ippc activity ..
. dioki organska petrokemija dioničko društvo (dioki d.d.), zagreb, čulinečka cesta , ippc activity ..
. ina-industrija nafte, d.d. (ina, d.d.), zagreb, avenija v. holjevca  – rafinerija nafte rijeka - urinj
(rijeka oil refinery - urinj, location: kostrena, urinj), ippc activity ..
. ina-industrija nafte, d.d. (ina, d.d.), zagreb, avenija v. holjevca  – rafinerija nafte sisak (sisak oil
refinery, location: sisak, ante kovačića ), ippc activity ..
. željezara split poduzeće za proizvodnju i preradu čelika d.d. "u stečaju" (željezara split d.d. "u
stečaju"), kaštel sućurac, cesta dr. f. tuđmana bb, ippc activity ..
. petrokemija, d.d. tvornica gnojiva (petrokemija, d.d.), kutina, aleja vukovar , ippc activity ..b.
vi. chemicals
 r : regulation (ec) no / of the european parliament and of the council of  december 
concerning the registration, evaluation, authorisation and restriction of chemicals (reach), establishing a european
chemicals agency, amending directive //ec and repealing council regulation (eec) no / and commission
regulation (ec) no / as well as council directive //eec and commission directives //eec,
//eec, //ec and //ec (oj l , .., p. ).
(a) by way of derogation from article () and () and article  defining the deadline for the registration and preregistration of the substances mentioned therein, manufacturers, importers and producers of articles established in
croatia shall be granted an adaptation period of six months from the date of accession for pre-registration of phase-in
substances. the dates for the first and second registration deadline set out in article () and () shall be  months
from the date of accession.
(b) articles , , , ,  and  shall not apply in croatia for a period of six months from the date of accession.
(c) by way of derogation from the transitional arrangements specified for any substance included in annex xiv, if the
latest application date falls before the date of accession or less than six months after that date, applicants established
in croatia shall be granted an adaptation period of six months from the date of accession by the end of which
applications for authorisations must be received.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
appendix to annex v
list (*), as provided by croatia, of medicinal products for which a marketing authorisation issued under croatian
law prior to the date of accession shall remain valid until it is renewed in compliance with the union acquis or
until  june , whichever is earlier
inclusion on the list does not of itself indicate whether the medicinal product in question has a marketing authorisation
in compliance with the union acquis.
(*) see oj c  e, ...
l / en official journal of the european union ..
annex vi
rural development (referred to in article () of the act of accession)
temporary additional rural development measures for croatia
a. support for semi-subsistence farms undergoing restructuring
in the rural development legislative framework for the - programming period, as regards croatia, special
support for semi-subsistence agricultural holdings shall be granted, pursuant to the principles laid down in article 
of council regulation (ec) no /, to farmers in respect of applications approved by  december ,
provided that no similar general measures and/or support is foreseen in the new rural development regulation for the
- programming period.
b. producer groups
in the rural development legislative framework for the - programming period, as regards croatia, special
support to facilitate the setting up and administrative operation of producer groups shall be granted, pursuant to the
principles laid down in article  of council regulation (ec) no /, to producer groups which are officially
recognised by croatia's competent authority by  december , provided that no similar general measures and/or
support is foreseen in the new rural development regulation for the - programming period.
c. leader
in the rural development legislative framework for the - programming period, as regards croatia, the minimum
eafrd contribution to the rural development programme for leader shall be set on average at a level which is at least
half of the percentage of the budget that shall be applicable to the other member states, if such a requirement is set.
d. complements to direct payments
. support may be granted to farmers eligible for complementary national direct payments or aid under article  of
council regulation (ec) no /.
. the support granted to a farmer in respect of the years ,  and  shall not exceed the difference between:
(a) the level of direct payments applicable in croatia for the year concerned in accordance with article  of council
regulation (ec) no /; and
(b)  % of the level of direct payments applicable in the union as constituted on  april  in the relevant year.
. the union contribution to support granted under this subsection d in croatia in respect of the years ,  and
 shall not exceed  % of its respective total annual eafrd allocation.
. the union contribution rate for the complements to direct payments shall not exceed  %.
e. instrument for pre-accession assistance — rural development
. croatia may continue to contract or enter into commitments under the ipard programme under commission
regulation (ec) no / of  june  implementing council regulation (ec) no / establishing
an instrument for pre-accession assistance (ipa) () until it begins to contract or enter into commitments under the
relevant rural development regulation. croatia shall inform the commission of the date on which it begins contracting
or entering into commitments under the relevant rural development regulation.
. the commission shall adopt the necessary measures to this end in accordance with the procedure referred to in
article  of european parliament and council regulation (eu) no /. to that effect, the commission shall be
assisted by the ipa committee referred to in article () of council regulation (ec) no /.
f. ipard ex post evaluation
in the rural development legislative framework for the - programming period, as regards the implementation of
the ipard programme for croatia, expenditure relating to the ex post evaluation of the ipard programme provided for
in article  of commission regulation (ec) no / may be eligible under technical assistance.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
(
) oj l , .., p. .
g. modernisation of agricultural holdings
in the rural development legislative framework for the - programming period, as regards croatia, the maximum
intensity of an aid for the modernisation of agricultural holdings shall be  % of the amount of eligible investment for
the implementation of council directive //eec of  december  concerning the protection of waters against
pollution caused by nitrates from agricultural sources (), within a maximum period of four years from the date of
accession pursuant to articles () and () of that directive.
h. respect of standards
in the rural development legislative framework for the - programming period, as regards croatia, the statutory
management requirements referred to in annex ii to council regulation (ec) no / applicable in that
programming period shall be respected in accordance with the following timetable: requirements referred to in point
a of annex ii shall apply from  january ; requirements referred to in point b of annex ii shall apply from
 january ; and requirements referred to in point c of annex ii shall apply from  january .
annex vii
specific commitments undertaken by the republic of croatia in the accession negotiations (referred to in
article (), second subparagraph, of the act of accession)
. to continue to ensure effective implementation of its judicial reform strategy and action plan.
. to continue to strengthen the independence, accountability, impartiality and professionalism of the judiciary.
. to continue to improve the efficiency of the judiciary.
. to continue to improve the handling of domestic war crimes cases.
. to continue to ensure a sustained track record of substantial results based on efficient, effective and unbiased
investigation, prosecution and court rulings in organised crime and corruption cases at all levels including high level
corruption, and in vulnerable sectors such as public procurement.
. to continue to improve its track record of strengthened prevention measures in the fight against corruption and
conflict of interest.
. to continue to strengthen the protection of minorities, including through effective implementation of the constitutional act on the rights of national minorities (carnm).
. to continue to address outstanding refugee return issues.
. to continue to improve the protection of human rights.
. to continue to cooperate fully with the international criminal tribunal for the former yugoslavia.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
(
) oj l , .., p. .
g. modernisation of agricultural holdings
in the rural development legislative framework for the - programming period, as regards croatia, the maximum
intensity of an aid for the modernisation of agricultural holdings shall be  % of the amount of eligible investment for
the implementation of council directive //eec of  december  concerning the protection of waters against
pollution caused by nitrates from agricultural sources (), within a maximum period of four years from the date of
accession pursuant to articles () and () of that directive.
h. respect of standards
in the rural development legislative framework for the - programming period, as regards croatia, the statutory
management requirements referred to in annex ii to council regulation (ec) no / applicable in that
programming period shall be respected in accordance with the following timetable: requirements referred to in point
a of annex ii shall apply from  january ; requirements referred to in point b of annex ii shall apply from
 january ; and requirements referred to in point c of annex ii shall apply from  january .
annex vii
specific commitments undertaken by the republic of croatia in the accession negotiations (referred to in
article (), second subparagraph, of the act of accession)
. to continue to ensure effective implementation of its judicial reform strategy and action plan.
. to continue to strengthen the independence, accountability, impartiality and professionalism of the judiciary.
. to continue to improve the efficiency of the judiciary.
. to continue to improve the handling of domestic war crimes cases.
. to continue to ensure a sustained track record of substantial results based on efficient, effective and unbiased
investigation, prosecution and court rulings in organised crime and corruption cases at all levels including high level
corruption, and in vulnerable sectors such as public procurement.
. to continue to improve its track record of strengthened prevention measures in the fight against corruption and
conflict of interest.
. to continue to strengthen the protection of minorities, including through effective implementation of the constitutional act on the rights of national minorities (carnm).
. to continue to address outstanding refugee return issues.
. to continue to improve the protection of human rights.
. to continue to cooperate fully with the international criminal tribunal for the former yugoslavia.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
(
) oj l , .., p. .
annex viii
commitments undertaken by the republic of croatia on the restructuring of the croatian shipbuilding industry
(referred to in article (), third subparagraph, of the act of accession)
the shipbuilding companies to be restructured (hereinafter referred to as ‘the companies’) are the following:
— brodograđevna industrija . maj dioničko društvo, rijeka (hereinafter referred to as ‘. maj’)
— brodotrogir d.d., trogir (hereinafter referred to as ‘brodotrogir’)
— brodograđevna industrija split, dioničko društvo, split (hereinafter referred to as ‘brodosplit’)
— brodosplit-brodogradilište specijalnih objekata društvo s ograničenom odgovornošću, split (hereinafter
referred to as ‘bso’)
— brodogradilište kraljevica dioničko društvo za izgradnju i popravak brodova, kraljevica (hereinafter referred
to as ‘kraljevica’).
croatia agreed to carry out the restructuring of these companies through their privatisation on the basis of a competitive
tendering process. restructuring plans for these companies have been submitted by the bidders and accepted by the
croatian competition agency and the commission. the restructuring plans will be incorporated in the respective
privatisation contracts to be concluded between croatia and the buyers of the companies.
the restructuring plans submitted for each of these companies specify the following key conditions to be respected in the
restructuring process:
— all state aid received by these companies since  march  must be counted as restructuring aid. the companies
shall provide a contribution to the restructuring plan from their own resources which must be real, free of state aid
and which represents at least  % of the total restructuring costs.
— the overall production capacity of the companies shall be reduced compared to the levels of  june  from
  cgt to   cgt. the companies shall reduce their production capacity no later than twelve months
after the signing of the privatisation contract. capacity reduction shall be implemented through the permanent closure
of slipways, through the designation of slipways for exclusive military production within the meaning of article 
of the tfeu and/or through surface area reduction. the cgts are the units of measurement of output calculated
according to the applicable oecd rules.
— the total annual production of the companies shall be limited to   cgt for a ten year period, starting on
 january . the companies' output will be limited to the following levels ():
— . maj:   cgt
— brodotrogir:   cgt
— brodosplit and bso:   cgt
— kraljevica:   cgt
the companies may agree to review their individual production limits. on the basis of binding agreements, they can
expressly establish which portion of their individual production quota (expressed in cgts) they cede to each other.
the overall yearly production limit of   cgt shall be respected.
— the restructuring plans also specify a number of other measures which each company will implement to ensure a
return to long term viability.
any subsequent change to these plans shall comply with the key conditions in the restructuring process listed above and
shall be submitted to the commission for acceptance.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
(
) the annual production of a given company is calculated as follows: the start of production of a ship is the planned date of steel
cutting and the end of production is the date of expected delivery of the ship as set out in the contract with the buyer (or the
anticipated date of delivery of the incomplete ship when the construction of a ship is shared between two companies). the number of
cgts corresponding to a ship is linearly allocated to the calendar years covering the production period. the total output of a company
in a given year is calculated by adding the number of cgts produced over that year.
the companies shall not receive any new rescue or restructuring aid until at least ten years have elapsed since the date of
signature of the privatisation contract. upon croatia's accession, the commission shall order croatia to recover any rescue
or restructuring aid granted in breach of this provision, with compound interest.
the restructuring plans that have been accepted by the croatian competition agency and by the commission will be
incorporated in the respective privatisation contracts to be concluded between croatia and buyers of the companies. the
privatisation contracts shall be submitted to the commission for acceptance and shall be signed before croatia's accession.
the commission shall closely monitor the implementation of the restructuring plans and compliance with the conditions
set out in this annex regarding the level of state aid, the own contribution, the capacity reductions, the production
limitation and the measures taken to ensure a return to viability.
this monitoring shall be carried out each year of the restructuring period. croatia shall comply fully with all the
arrangements for monitoring. in particular:
— croatia shall supply the commission with six-monthly reports concerning the restructuring of the benefiting
companies, no later than  january and  july each year until the end of the restructuring period.
— the reports shall contain all the information necessary to monitor the restructuring process, the own contribution, the
reduction of capacity, the production limitation and the measures taken to ensure a return to viability.
— croatia shall submit reports on the annual output of the companies under restructuring no later than  july each
year, until the end of .
— croatia shall oblige the companies to disclose all relevant data which might, under other circumstances, be considered
as confidential. the commission shall ensure that the company-specific confidential information is not disclosed.
the commission may at any time decide to mandate an independent expert to evaluate the monitoring results, undertake
any research necessary and report to the commission. croatia will provide full cooperation to the independent expert
appointed by the commission and ensure that such expert has full access to all information needed to carry out the tasks
entrusted to him by the commission.
upon croatia's accession, the commission shall order croatia to recover all rescue or restructuring aid granted since
 march  to a particular company, with compound interest if:
— the privatisation contract for this company has not yet been signed or does not fully incorporate the conditions set
out in the restructuring plan accepted by the croatian competition agency and by the commission, or
— the company has not provided a real, state aid free contribution from its own resources which represents at least
 % of the restructuring costs, or
— the reduction of the overall production capacity has not been implemented within twelve months from the signing of
the privatisation contract. in that case, the recovery of the aid shall only be required from those companies that have
not achieved the following individual reductions of capacity:
— . maj: by   cgt
— brodotrogir: by   cgt
— brodosplit and bso: by   cgt
— kraljevica: by   cgt, or
— the overall production limitation for the companies (i.e.   cgt) has been exceeded in any individual calendar
year between  and . in that case, the recovery of the aid shall be required from those companies that have
exceeded their individual production limits (if applicable, as amended by a legally binding agreement with another
shipbuilding company).
l / en official journal of the european union ..
annex ix
commitments undertaken by the republic of croatia on the restructuring of the steel sector (referred to in
article (), third subparagraph, of the act of accession)
by letter dated  may , croatia informed the commission that it received recognition of debt from the steel
producer cmc sisak d.o.o., corresponding to the restructuring aid, received by that company over the period from
 march  until  february , plus compound interest (). the state aid received, without compound interest,
amounts to hrk   ,.
upon croatia's accession, in the event that the total amount of this aid plus compound interest has not been reimbursed
by cmc sisak d.o.o., the commission shall order croatia to recover any rescue and restructuring aid granted to that
company since  march , with compound interest.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
(
) to be calculated according to articles  to  of commission regulation (ec) no / of  april  implementing council
regulation (ec) no / laying down detailed rules for the application of article  of the ec treaty (oj l , .., p. ),
as last amended by commission regulation (ec) no / (oj l , .., p. ).
protocol
on certain arrangements concerning a possible one-off transfer of assigned amount units issued
under the kyoto protocol to the united nations framework convention on climate change to the
republic of croatia, as well as the related compensation
the high contracting parties,
noting that in view of the specific historical circumstances that have affected croatia, it has been agreed to express a
readiness to provide assistance to croatia through a one-off transfer of assigned amount units issued under the kyoto
protocol to the united nations framework convention on climate change (the ‘kyoto protocol’),
noting that any such transfer would only be made on a single occasion, would not set a precedent and would reflect
the unique and exceptional nature of croatia's situation,
stressing that any such transfer would have to be compensated for by croatia through an adjustment of its obligations
under decision no //ec of the european parliament and of the council of  april  on the effort of
member states to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions to meet the community's greenhouse gas emission reduction
commitments up to  () so as to ensure environmental integrity by avoiding an increase in the total amount of
allowed emissions of the union and croatia until ,
have agreed on the following provisions:
part i
transfer
article 
this part shall apply to measures relating to a possible one-off
transfer of a quantity of assigned amount units issued under
the kyoto protocol (aaus) to croatia.
article 
no transfer shall take place unless croatia has withdrawn its
appeal against the decision of the enforcement branch of the
compliance committee of the kyoto protocol in accordance
with any relevant rules and time-limits governing the withdrawal of appeals, before the start of the unfccc conference
in durban ( november -  december ).
any transfer shall be conditional upon the determination by the
unfccc expert review team, after the true-up period, that
croatia has fallen short of its commitments under article 
of the kyoto protocol.
no transfer shall take place unless croatia has made all
reasonable efforts to comply with its commitments under
article  of the kyoto protocol, including the full use of
removal units from land use, land-use change and forestry.
article 
any decision on the transfer of aaus shall be adopted in
accordance with the examination procedure referred to in
article  of regulation (eu) no / of the european
parliament and of the council of  february  laying
down the rules and general principles concerning mechanisms
for control by member states of the commission's exercise of
implementing powers (). the commission shall be assisted by
the climate change committee established by article  of
decision no //ec of the european parliament and of
the council of  february  concerning a mechanism for
monitoring community greenhouse gas emissions and for
implementing the kyoto protocol (). that committee shall be
a committee within the meaning of european parliament and
council regulation (eu) no /. no such decision shall
be adopted where no opinion is delivered.
the aaus to be transferred shall be drawn from the quantity of
aaus referred to in article  of commission decision
//ec of  december  determining the respective
emission levels allocated to the community and each of its
member states under the kyoto protocol pursuant to council
decision //ec ().
any transfer shall not exceed a total quantity of   
aaus.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
(
) oj l , .., p. .
(
) oj l , .., p. .
(
) oj l , .., p. .
(
) oj l , .., p. . decision as amended by commission
decision //eu (oj l , .., p. ).
part ii
compensation
article 
this part shall apply to the compensation to be provided by
croatia in the event of a transfer of aaus in accordance with
the provisions of part i.
article 
. croatia shall compensate for any aaus transferred to it
through an adjustment, pursuant to this article, of its
obligations under european parliament and council decision
no //ec.
in particular, the equivalent amount in tonnes of carbon dioxide
equivalent of any aaus transferred shall, pursuant to this
article, be subtracted from croatia's annual emission allocations
once they have been determined pursuant to article () of
european parliament and council decision no //ec.
. the commission shall publish the figures for croatia's
annual emission allocations resulting from the subtraction
made in accordance with paragraph .
.. official en journal of the european union l /

final act
.. official en journal of the european union l /

i. text of the final act
. the plenipotentiaries of:
his majesty the king of the belgians,
the president of the republic of bulgaria,
the president of the czech republic,
her majesty the queen of denmark,
the president of the federal republic of germany,
the president of the republic of estonia,
the president of ireland,
the president of the hellenic republic,
his majesty the king of spain,
the president of the french republic,
the republic of croatia,
the president of the italian republic,
the president of the republic of cyprus,
the president of the republic of latvia,
the president of the republic of lithuania,
his royal highness the grand duke of luxembourg,
the president of the republic of hungary,
the president of malta,
her majesty the queen of the netherlands,
the federal president of the republic of austria,
the president of the republic of poland,
the president of the portuguese republic,
the president of romania,
the president of the republic of slovenia,
the president of the slovak republic,
the president of the republic of finland,
the government of the kingdom of sweden,
her majesty the queen of the united kingdom of great britain and northern
ireland,
.. official en journal of the european union l /
assembled at brussels on the ninth day of december in the year two thousand and eleven on the
occasion of the signature of the treaty between the kingdom of belgium, the republic of bulgaria, the
czech republic, the kingdom of denmark, the federal republic of germany, the republic of estonia,
ireland, the hellenic republic, the kingdom of spain, the french republic, the italian republic, the
republic of cyprus, the republic of latvia, the republic of lithuania, the grand duchy of luxembourg,
the republic of hungary, the republic of malta, the kingdom of the netherlands, the republic of
austria, the republic of poland, the portuguese republic, romania, the republic of slovenia, the
slovak republic, the republic of finland, the kingdom of sweden, the united kingdom of great
britain and northern ireland (member states of the european union) and the republic of croatia
concerning the accession of the republic of croatia to the european union.
have placed on record the fact that the following texts have been drawn up and adopted within the
conference between the member states of the european union and the republic of croatia concerning
the accession of the republic of croatia to the european union:
i. the treaty between the kingdom of belgium, the republic of bulgaria, the czech republic, the
kingdom of denmark, the federal republic of germany, the republic of estonia, ireland, the
hellenic republic, the kingdom of spain, the french republic, the italian republic, the republic
of cyprus, the republic of latvia, the republic of lithuania, the grand duchy of luxembourg, the
republic of hungary, the republic of malta, the kingdom of the netherlands, the republic of
austria, the republic of poland, the portuguese republic, romania, the republic of slovenia, the
slovak republic, the republic of finland, the kingdom of sweden, the united kingdom of great
britain and northern ireland (member states of the european union) and the republic of croatia
concerning the accession of the republic of croatia to the european union (hereinafter ‘the treaty of
accession’);
ii. the act concerning the conditions of accession of the republic of croatia and the adjustments to the
treaty on european union, the treaty on the functioning of the european union and to the treaty
establishing the european atomic energy community (hereinafter ‘the act of accession’);
iii. the texts listed below which are annexed to the act of accession:
a. annex i: list of conventions and protocols to which the republic of croatia accedes upon
accession (referred to in article () of the act of accession),
annex ii: list of provisions of the schengen acquis as integrated into the framework of the
european union and the acts building upon it or otherwise related to it, to be
binding on, and applicable in, the republic of croatia as of accession (referred to in
article () of the act of accession),
annex iii: list referred to in article  of the act of accession: adaptations to acts adopted by
the institutions,
annex iv: list referred to in article  of the act of accession: other permanent provisions,
annex v: list referred to in article  of the act of accession: transitional measures,
annex vi: rural development (referred to in article () of the act of accession),
annex vii: specific commitments undertaken by the republic of croatia in the accession
negotiations (referred to in article (), second subparagraph, of the act of
accession),
annex viii: commitments undertaken by the republic of croatia on the restructuring of the
croatian shipbuilding industry (referred to in article (), third subparagraph, of
the act of accession),
annex ix: commitments undertaken by the republic of croatia on the restructuring of the
steel sector (referred to in article (), third subparagraph, of the act of accession);
l / en official journal of the european union ..
b. protocol on certain arrangements concerning a possible one-off transfer of assigned amount units
issued under the kyoto protocol to the united nations framework convention on climate
change to the republic of croatia, as well as the related compensation;
c. the texts of the treaty on european union, the treaty on the functioning of the european union
and of the treaty establishing the european atomic energy community, and the treaties
amending or supplementing them, including the treaty concerning the accession of the
kingdom of denmark, ireland and the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland,
the treaty concerning the accession of the hellenic republic, the treaty concerning the accession
of the kingdom of spain and the portuguese republic, the treaty concerning the accession of the
republic of austria, the republic of finland and the kingdom of sweden, the treaty concerning
the accession of the czech republic, the republic of estonia, the republic of cyprus, the
republic of latvia, the republic of lithuania, the republic of hungary, the republic of malta,
the republic of poland, the republic of slovenia and the slovak republic and the treaty
concerning the accession of the republic of bulgaria and romania in the croatian language.
. the high contracting parties have reached political agreement on a set of adaptations to acts adopted by
the institutions required by reason of accession and invite the council and the commission to adopt
these adaptations before accession in accordance with article  of the act of accession, as referred to
in article () of the treaty of accession, completed and updated where necessary to take account of the
evolution of the law of the union.
. the high contracting parties undertake to communicate to the commission and to each other all
necessary information required for the application of the act of accession. where necessary, this
information shall be provided in such good time before the date of accession as to enable the full
application of the act of accession from the date of accession, in particular as regards the functioning of
the internal market. in this context early notification under article  of the act of accession of the
measures adopted by the republic of croatia is of primary importance. the commission may inform the
republic of croatia of the time by which it considers it appropriate to receive or transmit specific
information.
by this day of signature, the high contracting parties have been provided with a list setting out the
information obligations in the veterinary domain.
. the plenipotentiaries have taken note of the following declarations which have been made and are
annexed to this final act:
a. joint declaration by the present member states
joint declaration on the full application of the provisions of the schengen acquis
b. joint declaration by various present member states
joint declaration by the federal republic of germany and the republic of austria on the free
movement of workers: croatia
c. joint declaration by the present member states and the republic of croatia
joint declaration on the european development fund
d. declaration by the republic of croatia
declaration by the republic of croatia concerning the transitional arrangement for the liberalisation
of the croatian agricultural land market
. the plenipotentiaries have taken note of the exchange of letters between the european union and the
republic of croatia on an information and consultation procedure for the adoption of certain decisions
and other measures to be taken during the period preceding accession and which is attached to this final
act.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
съставено в брюксел на девети декември две хиляди и единадесета година.
hecho en bruselas, el nueve de diciembre de dos mil once.
v bruselu dne devátého prosince dva tisíce jedenáct.
udfærdiget i bruxelles den niende december to tusind og elleve.
geschehen zu brüssel am neunten dezember zweitausendelf.
kahe tuhande üheteistkümnenda aasta detsembrikuu üheksandal päeval brüsselis.
'εγινε στις βρυξέλλες, στις εννέα δεκεμβρίου δύο χιλιάδες έντεκα.
done at brussels on the ninth day of december in the year two thousand and eleven.
fait à bruxelles, le neuf décembre deux mille onze.
arna dhéanamh sa bhruiséil, an naoú lá de mhí na nollag an bhliain dhá mhíle agus a haon déag.
sastavljeno u bruxellesu dana devetog prosinca godine dvije tisuće jedanaeste.
fatto a bruxelles, addì nove dicembre duemilaundici.
briselē, divtūkstoš vienpadsmitā gada devītajā decembrī.
priimta du tūkstančiai vienuoliktų metų gruodžio devintą dieną briuselyje.
kelt brüsszelben, a kétezer-tizenegyedik év december havának kilencedik napján.
magħmul fi brussell, fid-disa jum ta' diċembru tas-sena elfejn u ħdax.
gedaan te brussel, de negende december tweeduizend elf.
sporządzono w brukseli dnia dziewiątego grudnia roku dwa tysiące jedenastego.
feito em bruxelas, em nove de dezembro de dois mil e onze.
întocmit la bruxelles la nouă decembrie două mii unsprezece.
v bruseli dňa deviateho decembra dvetisícjedenásť.
v bruslju, dne devetega decembra leta dva tisoč enajst.
tehty brysselissä yhdeksäntenä päivänä joulukuuta vuonna kaksituhattayksitoista.
som skedde i bryssel den nionde december tjugohundraelva.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
voor zijne majesteit de koning der belgen
pour sa majesté le roi des belges
für seine majestät den könig der belgier
deze handtekening verbindt eveneens de vlaamse gemeenschap, de franse gemeenschap, de duitstalige
gemeenschap, het vlaamse gewest, het waalse gewest en het brussels hoofdstedelijk gewest.
cette signature engage également la communauté française, la communauté flamande, la communauté
germanophone, la région wallonne, la région flamande et la région de bruxelles-capitale.
diese unterschrift bindet zugleich die deutschsprachige gemeinschaft, die flämische gemeinschaft, die
französische gemeinschaft, die wallonische region, die flämische region und die region brüssel-hauptstadt.
за република българия
za prezidenta české republiky
for hendes majestæt danmarks dronning
für den präsidenten der bundesrepublik deutschland
eesti vabariigi presidendi nimel
.. official en journal of the european union l /
thar ceann uachtarán na héireann
for the president of ireland
για τον πρόεδρο της ελληνικής δημοκρατίας
por su majestad el rey de españa
pour le président de la république française
za republiku hrvatsku
per il presidente della repubblica italiana
για τον πρόεδρο της κυπριακής δημοκρατίας
l / en official journal of the european union ..
latvijas republikas valsts prezidenta vārdā –
lietuvos respublikos prezidentės vardu
pour son altesse royale le grand-duc de luxembourg
a magyar köztársaság elnöke részéről
għall-president ta' malta
voor hare majesteit de koningin der nederlanden
.. official en journal of the european union l /
für den bundespräsidenten der republik österreich
za prezydenta rzeczypospolitej polskiej
pelo presidente da república portuguesa
pentru președintele româniei
za predsednika republike slovenije
za prezidenta slovenskej republiky
l / en official journal of the european union ..
suomen tasavallan presidentin puolesta
för republiken finlands president
för konungariket sveriges regering
for her majesty the queen of the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland
.. official en journal of the european union l /
ii. declarations
a. joint declaration by the present member states
joint declaration on the full application of the provisions of the schengen acquis
it is understood that the agreed procedures for the future full application by the republic of croatia of all
provisions of the schengen acquis - as they will be included in the treaty concerning the accession of
croatia to the union (‘croatia's treaty of accession’) - are without prejudice to and have no implications for
the decision to be taken by the council for the full application of the provisions of the schengen acquis in
the republic of bulgaria and romania.
the decision of the council on the full application of the provisions of the schengen acquis in bulgaria and
romania shall be taken on the basis of the procedure laid down in that respect in the treaty concerning the
accession of bulgaria and romania to the union and in line with the council conclusions of  june 
on the completion of the process of evaluation of the state of preparedness of bulgaria and romania to
implement all provisions of the schengen acquis.
the agreed procedures for the future full application by croatia of all provisions of the schengen acquis - as
they will be included in croatia's treaty of accession - do not create a legal obligation in any other context
than that of croatia's treaty of accession.
b. joint declaration by various present member states
joint declaration by the federal republic of germany and the republic of austria on the free movement of
workers: croatia
the wording of paragraph  of the transitional measures on the free movement of workers under directive
//ec in annex v, section , to the act of accession is understood by the federal republic of germany
and the republic of austria in agreement with the commission as meaning that ‘certain regions’ may, where
appropriate, also comprise the entire national territory.
c. joint declaration by the present member states and the republic of croatia
joint declaration on the european development fund
the republic of croatia will accede to the european development fund as of the entry into force of the
new multiannual financial framework of cooperation following its accession to the union and will
contribute to it as of  january of the second calendar year following the date of its accession.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
d. declaration by the republic of croatia
declaration by the republic of croatia concerning the transitional arrangement for the liberalisation of the
croatian agricultural land market
having regard to the transitional arrangement with respect to the acquisition of agricultural land in the
republic of croatia by natural and legal persons from the eu/eea, as provided for in annex v of the act of
accession,
having regard to the provision which stipulates that the commission, at the request of the republic of
croatia, shall decide upon the extension of the seven-year transitional period for an additional three years,
provided that there is sufficient evidence that, upon expiry of the seven-year transitional period, there will be
serious disturbances or a threat of serious disturbances on the agricultural land market of the republic of
croatia,
the republic of croatia declares that, should the above-mentioned extension of the transitional period be
granted, it will endeavour to carry out the necessary steps to liberalise the acquisition of agricultural land in
the specified areas before the expiry of the fixed three-year period.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
iii. exchange of letters
between the european union and the republic of croatia on an information and consultation
procedure for the adoption of certain decisions and other measures to be taken during the
period preceding accession
letter no 
sir,
i have the honour to refer to the question concerning an information and consultation procedure for the
adoption of certain decisions and other measures to be taken during the period preceding the accession of
your country to the european union which was raised in the framework of the accession negotiations.
i hereby confirm that the european union is able to agree to such a procedure, in the terms set out in the
annex to this letter, which could be applied in respect of the republic of croatia as of the date on which
the accession conference declares that the accession negotiations have been finally concluded.
i would be obliged if you could confirm that your government is in agreement with the contents of this
letter.
yours faithfully,
l / en official journal of the european union ..
annex
information and consultation procedure for the adoption of certain decisions and other measures to be taken
during the period preceding accession
i.
. in order to ensure that the republic of croatia is kept adequately informed, any proposal, communication, recommendation or initiative which is intended to lead to the adoption of a legal act of the european parliament and
council, the council, or the european council shall be brought to the knowledge of croatia after being transmitted
to the council or the european council.
. consultations shall take place pursuant to a reasoned request by croatia, which shall set out expressly therein its
interests as a future member of the union and its observations.
. administrative decisions shall not, as a general rule, give rise to consultations.
. consultations shall take place within an interim committee composed of representatives of the union and of
croatia. save for a reasoned objection from the union or croatia, consultations may also take place in the form of
an exchange of messages by electronic means, in particular in common foreign and security policy matters.
. on the union side, the members of the interim committee shall be the members of the permanent representatives
committee or persons designated by them for this purpose. where appropriate, the members of the interim
committee may be the members of the political and security committee. the commission shall be adequately
represented.
. the interim committee shall be assisted by a secretariat, which shall be that of the accession conference, continued
for this purpose.
. consultations shall take place as soon as the preparatory work carried out at union level with a view to the
adoption of the acts mentioned in paragraph  has produced common guidelines enabling such consultations to be
usefully arranged.
. if serious difficulties remain after consultations, the matter may be raised at ministerial level at the request of
croatia.
. the above provisions shall apply mutatis mutandis to the decisions of the board of governors of the european
investment bank.
. the procedure laid down in the above paragraphs shall also apply to any decision to be taken by croatia which
might affect the commitments resulting from its position as a future member of the union.
ii.
. the union and croatia shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the latter's accession to the agreements or
conventions and protocols referred to in articles (), () and () of the act concerning the conditions of
accession of the republic of croatia and the adjustments to the treaties on which the european union is founded,
hereinafter referred to as ‘the act of accession’, coincides so far as possible with the entry into force of the treaty of
accession.
. with regard to the negotiations with the co-contracting parties of the protocols referred to in the second
subparagraph of article () of the act of accession, the representatives of croatia shall be associated with the
work as observers, side by side with the representatives of the present member states.
. certain non-preferential agreements concluded by the union, which remain in force after the date of accession, may
be the subject of adaptations or adjustments in order to take account of the enlargement of the union. these
adaptations or adjustments will be negotiated by the union in association with the representatives of croatia in
accordance with the procedure referred to in paragraph .
iii.
. the institutions shall, in due course, draw up the texts referred to in article  of the act of accession. to that end,
croatia shall provide the institutions with translations of those texts in a timely manner.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
letter no 
sir,
i have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter which reads as follows:
‘i have the honour to refer to the question concerning an information and consultation procedure for
the adoption of certain decisions and other measures to be taken during the period preceding the
accession of your country to the european union which was raised in the framework of the accession
negotiations.
i hereby confirm that the european union is able to agree to such a procedure, in the terms set out in
the annex to this letter, which could be applied in respect of the republic of croatia as of the date on
which the accession conference declares that the accession negotiations have been finally concluded.
i would be obliged if you could confirm that your government is in agreement with the contents of
this letter.’.
i have the honour to confirm that my government is in agreement with the contents of this letter.
yours faithfully,
l / en official journal of the european union ..
i. text of the final act
. the plenipotentiaries of:
his majesty the king of the belgians,
the president of the republic of bulgaria,
the president of the czech republic,
her majesty the queen of denmark,
the president of the federal republic of germany,
the president of the republic of estonia,
the president of ireland,
the president of the hellenic republic,
his majesty the king of spain,
the president of the french republic,
the republic of croatia,
the president of the italian republic,
the president of the republic of cyprus,
the president of the republic of latvia,
the president of the republic of lithuania,
his royal highness the grand duke of luxembourg,
the president of the republic of hungary,
the president of malta,
her majesty the queen of the netherlands,
the federal president of the republic of austria,
the president of the republic of poland,
the president of the portuguese republic,
the president of romania,
the president of the republic of slovenia,
the president of the slovak republic,
the president of the republic of finland,
the government of the kingdom of sweden,
her majesty the queen of the united kingdom of great britain and northern
ireland,
.. official en journal of the european union l /
assembled at brussels on the ninth day of december in the year two thousand and eleven on the
occasion of the signature of the treaty between the kingdom of belgium, the republic of bulgaria, the
czech republic, the kingdom of denmark, the federal republic of germany, the republic of estonia,
ireland, the hellenic republic, the kingdom of spain, the french republic, the italian republic, the
republic of cyprus, the republic of latvia, the republic of lithuania, the grand duchy of luxembourg,
the republic of hungary, the republic of malta, the kingdom of the netherlands, the republic of
austria, the republic of poland, the portuguese republic, romania, the republic of slovenia, the
slovak republic, the republic of finland, the kingdom of sweden, the united kingdom of great
britain and northern ireland (member states of the european union) and the republic of croatia
concerning the accession of the republic of croatia to the european union.
have placed on record the fact that the following texts have been drawn up and adopted within the
conference between the member states of the european union and the republic of croatia concerning
the accession of the republic of croatia to the european union:
i. the treaty between the kingdom of belgium, the republic of bulgaria, the czech republic, the
kingdom of denmark, the federal republic of germany, the republic of estonia, ireland, the
hellenic republic, the kingdom of spain, the french republic, the italian republic, the republic
of cyprus, the republic of latvia, the republic of lithuania, the grand duchy of luxembourg, the
republic of hungary, the republic of malta, the kingdom of the netherlands, the republic of
austria, the republic of poland, the portuguese republic, romania, the republic of slovenia, the
slovak republic, the republic of finland, the kingdom of sweden, the united kingdom of great
britain and northern ireland (member states of the european union) and the republic of croatia
concerning the accession of the republic of croatia to the european union (hereinafter ‘the treaty of
accession’);
ii. the act concerning the conditions of accession of the republic of croatia and the adjustments to the
treaty on european union, the treaty on the functioning of the european union and to the treaty
establishing the european atomic energy community (hereinafter ‘the act of accession’);
iii. the texts listed below which are annexed to the act of accession:
a. annex i: list of conventions and protocols to which the republic of croatia accedes upon
accession (referred to in article () of the act of accession),
annex ii: list of provisions of the schengen acquis as integrated into the framework of the
european union and the acts building upon it or otherwise related to it, to be
binding on, and applicable in, the republic of croatia as of accession (referred to in
article () of the act of accession),
annex iii: list referred to in article  of the act of accession: adaptations to acts adopted by
the institutions,
annex iv: list referred to in article  of the act of accession: other permanent provisions,
annex v: list referred to in article  of the act of accession: transitional measures,
annex vi: rural development (referred to in article () of the act of accession),
annex vii: specific commitments undertaken by the republic of croatia in the accession
negotiations (referred to in article (), second subparagraph, of the act of
accession),
annex viii: commitments undertaken by the republic of croatia on the restructuring of the
croatian shipbuilding industry (referred to in article (), third subparagraph, of
the act of accession),
annex ix: commitments undertaken by the republic of croatia on the restructuring of the
steel sector (referred to in article (), third subparagraph, of the act of accession);
l / en official journal of the european union ..
b. protocol on certain arrangements concerning a possible one-off transfer of assigned amount units
issued under the kyoto protocol to the united nations framework convention on climate
change to the republic of croatia, as well as the related compensation;
c. the texts of the treaty on european union, the treaty on the functioning of the european union
and of the treaty establishing the european atomic energy community, and the treaties
amending or supplementing them, including the treaty concerning the accession of the
kingdom of denmark, ireland and the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland,
the treaty concerning the accession of the hellenic republic, the treaty concerning the accession
of the kingdom of spain and the portuguese republic, the treaty concerning the accession of the
republic of austria, the republic of finland and the kingdom of sweden, the treaty concerning
the accession of the czech republic, the republic of estonia, the republic of cyprus, the
republic of latvia, the republic of lithuania, the republic of hungary, the republic of malta,
the republic of poland, the republic of slovenia and the slovak republic and the treaty
concerning the accession of the republic of bulgaria and romania in the croatian language.
. the high contracting parties have reached political agreement on a set of adaptations to acts adopted by
the institutions required by reason of accession and invite the council and the commission to adopt
these adaptations before accession in accordance with article  of the act of accession, as referred to
in article () of the treaty of accession, completed and updated where necessary to take account of the
evolution of the law of the union.
. the high contracting parties undertake to communicate to the commission and to each other all
necessary information required for the application of the act of accession. where necessary, this
information shall be provided in such good time before the date of accession as to enable the full
application of the act of accession from the date of accession, in particular as regards the functioning of
the internal market. in this context early notification under article  of the act of accession of the
measures adopted by the republic of croatia is of primary importance. the commission may inform the
republic of croatia of the time by which it considers it appropriate to receive or transmit specific
information.
by this day of signature, the high contracting parties have been provided with a list setting out the
information obligations in the veterinary domain.
. the plenipotentiaries have taken note of the following declarations which have been made and are
annexed to this final act:
a. joint declaration by the present member states
joint declaration on the full application of the provisions of the schengen acquis
b. joint declaration by various present member states
joint declaration by the federal republic of germany and the republic of austria on the free
movement of workers: croatia
c. joint declaration by the present member states and the republic of croatia
joint declaration on the european development fund
d. declaration by the republic of croatia
declaration by the republic of croatia concerning the transitional arrangement for the liberalisation
of the croatian agricultural land market
. the plenipotentiaries have taken note of the exchange of letters between the european union and the
republic of croatia on an information and consultation procedure for the adoption of certain decisions
and other measures to be taken during the period preceding accession and which is attached to this final
act.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
съставено в брюксел на девети декември две хиляди и единадесета година.
hecho en bruselas, el nueve de diciembre de dos mil once.
v bruselu dne devátého prosince dva tisíce jedenáct.
udfærdiget i bruxelles den niende december to tusind og elleve.
geschehen zu brüssel am neunten dezember zweitausendelf.
kahe tuhande üheteistkümnenda aasta detsembrikuu üheksandal päeval brüsselis.
'εγινε στις βρυξέλλες, στις εννέα δεκεμβρίου δύο χιλιάδες έντεκα.
done at brussels on the ninth day of december in the year two thousand and eleven.
fait à bruxelles, le neuf décembre deux mille onze.
arna dhéanamh sa bhruiséil, an naoú lá de mhí na nollag an bhliain dhá mhíle agus a haon déag.
sastavljeno u bruxellesu dana devetog prosinca godine dvije tisuće jedanaeste.
fatto a bruxelles, addì nove dicembre duemilaundici.
briselē, divtūkstoš vienpadsmitā gada devītajā decembrī.
priimta du tūkstančiai vienuoliktų metų gruodžio devintą dieną briuselyje.
kelt brüsszelben, a kétezer-tizenegyedik év december havának kilencedik napján.
magħmul fi brussell, fid-disa jum ta' diċembru tas-sena elfejn u ħdax.
gedaan te brussel, de negende december tweeduizend elf.
sporządzono w brukseli dnia dziewiątego grudnia roku dwa tysiące jedenastego.
feito em bruxelas, em nove de dezembro de dois mil e onze.
întocmit la bruxelles la nouă decembrie două mii unsprezece.
v bruseli dňa deviateho decembra dvetisícjedenásť.
v bruslju, dne devetega decembra leta dva tisoč enajst.
tehty brysselissä yhdeksäntenä päivänä joulukuuta vuonna kaksituhattayksitoista.
som skedde i bryssel den nionde december tjugohundraelva.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
voor zijne majesteit de koning der belgen
pour sa majesté le roi des belges
für seine majestät den könig der belgier
deze handtekening verbindt eveneens de vlaamse gemeenschap, de franse gemeenschap, de duitstalige
gemeenschap, het vlaamse gewest, het waalse gewest en het brussels hoofdstedelijk gewest.
cette signature engage également la communauté française, la communauté flamande, la communauté
germanophone, la région wallonne, la région flamande et la région de bruxelles-capitale.
diese unterschrift bindet zugleich die deutschsprachige gemeinschaft, die flämische gemeinschaft, die
französische gemeinschaft, die wallonische region, die flämische region und die region brüssel-hauptstadt.
за република българия
za prezidenta české republiky
for hendes majestæt danmarks dronning
für den präsidenten der bundesrepublik deutschland
eesti vabariigi presidendi nimel
.. official en journal of the european union l /
thar ceann uachtarán na héireann
for the president of ireland
για τον πρόεδρο της ελληνικής δημοκρατίας
por su majestad el rey de españa
pour le président de la république française
za republiku hrvatsku
per il presidente della repubblica italiana
για τον πρόεδρο της κυπριακής δημοκρατίας
l / en official journal of the european union ..
latvijas republikas valsts prezidenta vārdā –
lietuvos respublikos prezidentės vardu
pour son altesse royale le grand-duc de luxembourg
a magyar köztársaság elnöke részéről
għall-president ta' malta
voor hare majesteit de koningin der nederlanden
.. official en journal of the european union l /
für den bundespräsidenten der republik österreich
za prezydenta rzeczypospolitej polskiej
pelo presidente da república portuguesa
pentru președintele româniei
za predsednika republike slovenije
za prezidenta slovenskej republiky
l / en official journal of the european union ..
suomen tasavallan presidentin puolesta
för republiken finlands president
för konungariket sveriges regering
for her majesty the queen of the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland
.. official en journal of the european union l /
ii. declarations
a. joint declaration by the present member states
joint declaration on the full application of the provisions of the schengen acquis
it is understood that the agreed procedures for the future full application by the republic of croatia of all
provisions of the schengen acquis - as they will be included in the treaty concerning the accession of
croatia to the union (‘croatia's treaty of accession’) - are without prejudice to and have no implications for
the decision to be taken by the council for the full application of the provisions of the schengen acquis in
the republic of bulgaria and romania.
the decision of the council on the full application of the provisions of the schengen acquis in bulgaria and
romania shall be taken on the basis of the procedure laid down in that respect in the treaty concerning the
accession of bulgaria and romania to the union and in line with the council conclusions of  june 
on the completion of the process of evaluation of the state of preparedness of bulgaria and romania to
implement all provisions of the schengen acquis.
the agreed procedures for the future full application by croatia of all provisions of the schengen acquis - as
they will be included in croatia's treaty of accession - do not create a legal obligation in any other context
than that of croatia's treaty of accession.
b. joint declaration by various present member states
joint declaration by the federal republic of germany and the republic of austria on the free movement of
workers: croatia
the wording of paragraph  of the transitional measures on the free movement of workers under directive
//ec in annex v, section , to the act of accession is understood by the federal republic of germany
and the republic of austria in agreement with the commission as meaning that ‘certain regions’ may, where
appropriate, also comprise the entire national territory.
c. joint declaration by the present member states and the republic of croatia
joint declaration on the european development fund
the republic of croatia will accede to the european development fund as of the entry into force of the
new multiannual financial framework of cooperation following its accession to the union and will
contribute to it as of  january of the second calendar year following the date of its accession.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
d. declaration by the republic of croatia
declaration by the republic of croatia concerning the transitional arrangement for the liberalisation of the
croatian agricultural land market
having regard to the transitional arrangement with respect to the acquisition of agricultural land in the
republic of croatia by natural and legal persons from the eu/eea, as provided for in annex v of the act of
accession,
having regard to the provision which stipulates that the commission, at the request of the republic of
croatia, shall decide upon the extension of the seven-year transitional period for an additional three years,
provided that there is sufficient evidence that, upon expiry of the seven-year transitional period, there will be
serious disturbances or a threat of serious disturbances on the agricultural land market of the republic of
croatia,
the republic of croatia declares that, should the above-mentioned extension of the transitional period be
granted, it will endeavour to carry out the necessary steps to liberalise the acquisition of agricultural land in
the specified areas before the expiry of the fixed three-year period.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
iii. exchange of letters
between the european union and the republic of croatia on an information and consultation
procedure for the adoption of certain decisions and other measures to be taken during the
period preceding accession
letter no 
sir,
i have the honour to refer to the question concerning an information and consultation procedure for the
adoption of certain decisions and other measures to be taken during the period preceding the accession of
your country to the european union which was raised in the framework of the accession negotiations.
i hereby confirm that the european union is able to agree to such a procedure, in the terms set out in the
annex to this letter, which could be applied in respect of the republic of croatia as of the date on which
the accession conference declares that the accession negotiations have been finally concluded.
i would be obliged if you could confirm that your government is in agreement with the contents of this
letter.
yours faithfully,
l / en official journal of the european union ..
annex
information and consultation procedure for the adoption of certain decisions and other measures to be taken
during the period preceding accession
i.
. in order to ensure that the republic of croatia is kept adequately informed, any proposal, communication, recommendation or initiative which is intended to lead to the adoption of a legal act of the european parliament and
council, the council, or the european council shall be brought to the knowledge of croatia after being transmitted
to the council or the european council.
. consultations shall take place pursuant to a reasoned request by croatia, which shall set out expressly therein its
interests as a future member of the union and its observations.
. administrative decisions shall not, as a general rule, give rise to consultations.
. consultations shall take place within an interim committee composed of representatives of the union and of
croatia. save for a reasoned objection from the union or croatia, consultations may also take place in the form of
an exchange of messages by electronic means, in particular in common foreign and security policy matters.
. on the union side, the members of the interim committee shall be the members of the permanent representatives
committee or persons designated by them for this purpose. where appropriate, the members of the interim
committee may be the members of the political and security committee. the commission shall be adequately
represented.
. the interim committee shall be assisted by a secretariat, which shall be that of the accession conference, continued
for this purpose.
. consultations shall take place as soon as the preparatory work carried out at union level with a view to the
adoption of the acts mentioned in paragraph  has produced common guidelines enabling such consultations to be
usefully arranged.
. if serious difficulties remain after consultations, the matter may be raised at ministerial level at the request of
croatia.
. the above provisions shall apply mutatis mutandis to the decisions of the board of governors of the european
investment bank.
. the procedure laid down in the above paragraphs shall also apply to any decision to be taken by croatia which
might affect the commitments resulting from its position as a future member of the union.
ii.
. the union and croatia shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the latter's accession to the agreements or
conventions and protocols referred to in articles (), () and () of the act concerning the conditions of
accession of the republic of croatia and the adjustments to the treaties on which the european union is founded,
hereinafter referred to as ‘the act of accession’, coincides so far as possible with the entry into force of the treaty of
accession.
. with regard to the negotiations with the co-contracting parties of the protocols referred to in the second
subparagraph of article () of the act of accession, the representatives of croatia shall be associated with the
work as observers, side by side with the representatives of the present member states.
. certain non-preferential agreements concluded by the union, which remain in force after the date of accession, may
be the subject of adaptations or adjustments in order to take account of the enlargement of the union. these
adaptations or adjustments will be negotiated by the union in association with the representatives of croatia in
accordance with the procedure referred to in paragraph .
iii.
. the institutions shall, in due course, draw up the texts referred to in article  of the act of accession. to that end,
croatia shall provide the institutions with translations of those texts in a timely manner.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
letter no 
sir,
i have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter which reads as follows:
‘i have the honour to refer to the question concerning an information and consultation procedure for
the adoption of certain decisions and other measures to be taken during the period preceding the
accession of your country to the european union which was raised in the framework of the accession
negotiations.
i hereby confirm that the european union is able to agree to such a procedure, in the terms set out in
the annex to this letter, which could be applied in respect of the republic of croatia as of the date on
which the accession conference declares that the accession negotiations have been finally concluded.
i would be obliged if you could confirm that your government is in agreement with the contents of
this letter.’.
i have the honour to confirm that my government is in agreement with the contents of this letter.
yours faithfully,
l / en official journal of the european union ..
ii. declarations
a. joint declaration by the present member states
joint declaration on the full application of the provisions of the schengen acquis
it is understood that the agreed procedures for the future full application by the republic of croatia of all
provisions of the schengen acquis - as they will be included in the treaty concerning the accession of
croatia to the union (‘croatia's treaty of accession’) - are without prejudice to and have no implications for
the decision to be taken by the council for the full application of the provisions of the schengen acquis in
the republic of bulgaria and romania.
the decision of the council on the full application of the provisions of the schengen acquis in bulgaria and
romania shall be taken on the basis of the procedure laid down in that respect in the treaty concerning the
accession of bulgaria and romania to the union and in line with the council conclusions of  june 
on the completion of the process of evaluation of the state of preparedness of bulgaria and romania to
implement all provisions of the schengen acquis.
the agreed procedures for the future full application by croatia of all provisions of the schengen acquis - as
they will be included in croatia's treaty of accession - do not create a legal obligation in any other context
than that of croatia's treaty of accession.
b. joint declaration by various present member states
joint declaration by the federal republic of germany and the republic of austria on the free movement of
workers: croatia
the wording of paragraph  of the transitional measures on the free movement of workers under directive
//ec in annex v, section , to the act of accession is understood by the federal republic of germany
and the republic of austria in agreement with the commission as meaning that ‘certain regions’ may, where
appropriate, also comprise the entire national territory.
c. joint declaration by the present member states and the republic of croatia
joint declaration on the european development fund
the republic of croatia will accede to the european development fund as of the entry into force of the
new multiannual financial framework of cooperation following its accession to the union and will
contribute to it as of  january of the second calendar year following the date of its accession.
l / en official journal of the european union ..
d. declaration by the republic of croatia
declaration by the republic of croatia concerning the transitional arrangement for the liberalisation of the
croatian agricultural land market
having regard to the transitional arrangement with respect to the acquisition of agricultural land in the
republic of croatia by natural and legal persons from the eu/eea, as provided for in annex v of the act of
accession,
having regard to the provision which stipulates that the commission, at the request of the republic of
croatia, shall decide upon the extension of the seven-year transitional period for an additional three years,
provided that there is sufficient evidence that, upon expiry of the seven-year transitional period, there will be
serious disturbances or a threat of serious disturbances on the agricultural land market of the republic of
croatia,
the republic of croatia declares that, should the above-mentioned extension of the transitional period be
granted, it will endeavour to carry out the necessary steps to liberalise the acquisition of agricultural land in
the specified areas before the expiry of the fixed three-year period.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
iii. exchange of letters
between the european union and the republic of croatia on an information and consultation
procedure for the adoption of certain decisions and other measures to be taken during the
period preceding accession
letter no 
sir,
i have the honour to refer to the question concerning an information and consultation procedure for the
adoption of certain decisions and other measures to be taken during the period preceding the accession of
your country to the european union which was raised in the framework of the accession negotiations.
i hereby confirm that the european union is able to agree to such a procedure, in the terms set out in the
annex to this letter, which could be applied in respect of the republic of croatia as of the date on which
the accession conference declares that the accession negotiations have been finally concluded.
i would be obliged if you could confirm that your government is in agreement with the contents of this
letter.
yours faithfully,
l / en official journal of the european union ..
annex
information and consultation procedure for the adoption of certain decisions and other measures to be taken
during the period preceding accession
i.
. in order to ensure that the republic of croatia is kept adequately informed, any proposal, communication, recommendation or initiative which is intended to lead to the adoption of a legal act of the european parliament and
council, the council, or the european council shall be brought to the knowledge of croatia after being transmitted
to the council or the european council.
. consultations shall take place pursuant to a reasoned request by croatia, which shall set out expressly therein its
interests as a future member of the union and its observations.
. administrative decisions shall not, as a general rule, give rise to consultations.
. consultations shall take place within an interim committee composed of representatives of the union and of
croatia. save for a reasoned objection from the union or croatia, consultations may also take place in the form of
an exchange of messages by electronic means, in particular in common foreign and security policy matters.
. on the union side, the members of the interim committee shall be the members of the permanent representatives
committee or persons designated by them for this purpose. where appropriate, the members of the interim
committee may be the members of the political and security committee. the commission shall be adequately
represented.
. the interim committee shall be assisted by a secretariat, which shall be that of the accession conference, continued
for this purpose.
. consultations shall take place as soon as the preparatory work carried out at union level with a view to the
adoption of the acts mentioned in paragraph  has produced common guidelines enabling such consultations to be
usefully arranged.
. if serious difficulties remain after consultations, the matter may be raised at ministerial level at the request of
croatia.
. the above provisions shall apply mutatis mutandis to the decisions of the board of governors of the european
investment bank.
. the procedure laid down in the above paragraphs shall also apply to any decision to be taken by croatia which
might affect the commitments resulting from its position as a future member of the union.
ii.
. the union and croatia shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the latter's accession to the agreements or
conventions and protocols referred to in articles (), () and () of the act concerning the conditions of
accession of the republic of croatia and the adjustments to the treaties on which the european union is founded,
hereinafter referred to as ‘the act of accession’, coincides so far as possible with the entry into force of the treaty of
accession.
. with regard to the negotiations with the co-contracting parties of the protocols referred to in the second
subparagraph of article () of the act of accession, the representatives of croatia shall be associated with the
work as observers, side by side with the representatives of the present member states.
. certain non-preferential agreements concluded by the union, which remain in force after the date of accession, may
be the subject of adaptations or adjustments in order to take account of the enlargement of the union. these
adaptations or adjustments will be negotiated by the union in association with the representatives of croatia in
accordance with the procedure referred to in paragraph .
iii.
. the institutions shall, in due course, draw up the texts referred to in article  of the act of accession. to that end,
croatia shall provide the institutions with translations of those texts in a timely manner.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
letter no 
sir,
i have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter which reads as follows:
‘i have the honour to refer to the question concerning an information and consultation procedure for
the adoption of certain decisions and other measures to be taken during the period preceding the
accession of your country to the european union which was raised in the framework of the accession
negotiations.
i hereby confirm that the european union is able to agree to such a procedure, in the terms set out in
the annex to this letter, which could be applied in respect of the republic of croatia as of the date on
which the accession conference declares that the accession negotiations have been finally concluded.
i would be obliged if you could confirm that your government is in agreement with the contents of
this letter.’.
i have the honour to confirm that my government is in agreement with the contents of this letter.
yours faithfully,
l / en official journal of the european union ..
iii. exchange of letters
between the european union and the republic of croatia on an information and consultation
procedure for the adoption of certain decisions and other measures to be taken during the
period preceding accession
letter no 
sir,
i have the honour to refer to the question concerning an information and consultation procedure for the
adoption of certain decisions and other measures to be taken during the period preceding the accession of
your country to the european union which was raised in the framework of the accession negotiations.
i hereby confirm that the european union is able to agree to such a procedure, in the terms set out in the
annex to this letter, which could be applied in respect of the republic of croatia as of the date on which
the accession conference declares that the accession negotiations have been finally concluded.
i would be obliged if you could confirm that your government is in agreement with the contents of this
letter.
yours faithfully,
l / en official journal of the european union ..
annex
information and consultation procedure for the adoption of certain decisions and other measures to be taken
during the period preceding accession
i.
. in order to ensure that the republic of croatia is kept adequately informed, any proposal, communication, recommendation or initiative which is intended to lead to the adoption of a legal act of the european parliament and
council, the council, or the european council shall be brought to the knowledge of croatia after being transmitted
to the council or the european council.
. consultations shall take place pursuant to a reasoned request by croatia, which shall set out expressly therein its
interests as a future member of the union and its observations.
. administrative decisions shall not, as a general rule, give rise to consultations.
. consultations shall take place within an interim committee composed of representatives of the union and of
croatia. save for a reasoned objection from the union or croatia, consultations may also take place in the form of
an exchange of messages by electronic means, in particular in common foreign and security policy matters.
. on the union side, the members of the interim committee shall be the members of the permanent representatives
committee or persons designated by them for this purpose. where appropriate, the members of the interim
committee may be the members of the political and security committee. the commission shall be adequately
represented.
. the interim committee shall be assisted by a secretariat, which shall be that of the accession conference, continued
for this purpose.
. consultations shall take place as soon as the preparatory work carried out at union level with a view to the
adoption of the acts mentioned in paragraph  has produced common guidelines enabling such consultations to be
usefully arranged.
. if serious difficulties remain after consultations, the matter may be raised at ministerial level at the request of
croatia.
. the above provisions shall apply mutatis mutandis to the decisions of the board of governors of the european
investment bank.
. the procedure laid down in the above paragraphs shall also apply to any decision to be taken by croatia which
might affect the commitments resulting from its position as a future member of the union.
ii.
. the union and croatia shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the latter's accession to the agreements or
conventions and protocols referred to in articles (), () and () of the act concerning the conditions of
accession of the republic of croatia and the adjustments to the treaties on which the european union is founded,
hereinafter referred to as ‘the act of accession’, coincides so far as possible with the entry into force of the treaty of
accession.
. with regard to the negotiations with the co-contracting parties of the protocols referred to in the second
subparagraph of article () of the act of accession, the representatives of croatia shall be associated with the
work as observers, side by side with the representatives of the present member states.
. certain non-preferential agreements concluded by the union, which remain in force after the date of accession, may
be the subject of adaptations or adjustments in order to take account of the enlargement of the union. these
adaptations or adjustments will be negotiated by the union in association with the representatives of croatia in
accordance with the procedure referred to in paragraph .
iii.
. the institutions shall, in due course, draw up the texts referred to in article  of the act of accession. to that end,
croatia shall provide the institutions with translations of those texts in a timely manner.
.. official en journal of the european union l /
letter no 
sir,
i have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter which reads as follows:
‘i have the honour to refer to the question concerning an information and consultation procedure for
the adoption of certain decisions and other measures to be taken during the period preceding the
accession of your country to the european union which was raised in the framework of the accession
negotiations.
i hereby confirm that the european union is able to agree to such a procedure, in the terms set out in
the annex to this letter, which could be applied in respect of the republic of croatia as of the date on
which the accession conference declares that the accession negotiations have been finally concluded.
i would be obliged if you could confirm that your government is in agreement with the contents of
this letter.’.
i have the honour to confirm that my government is in agreement with the contents of this letter.
yours faithfully,
l / en official journal of the european union ..